Q: What does WebCreek actually do?
A: WebCreek is a Houston-founded software development and IT staff augmentation firm, ~29 years old, with operations in 20+ countries. Founder/CEO is Jason Bott (founded 1996). Their model is “nearshoring” — providing custom software teams and individual technical staff to Fortune 500 clients and other large organizations. They’re not a product company; they’re a services/consulting firm. That means the role you’re interviewing for is almost certainly client-facing, on a long-term engagement at a Houston energy or industrial client — not an internal WebCreek product. The interview will likely have a “WebCreek + client” structure, possibly in two stages.

Q: Why does the JD mention “Senior Python Developer” in the body but “Embedded Software Engineer” in the title?
A: Two likely reasons. First, WebCreek tags multiple variations of the same role (their public job listings include both “Senior Backend Python Developer” and “Embedded Software Engineer”). Second, the actual end-client work straddles both worlds — Python application code that integrates with embedded industrial systems (PLCs, RTUs, edge gateways). You can ask this directly in the interview as a clarifying question — it shows you read the JD carefully. Frame: “I noticed the title says Embedded Software Engineer but the body emphasizes Python and SCADA integration — could you walk me through where this role sits on the spectrum from pure Python backend to embedded firmware?”

Q: Who is the likely end client?
A: Houston + on-site + SCADA + CygNet (a Weatherford oil & gas SCADA platform) + time-series databases for high-ingestion industrial data → almost certainly a midstream or upstream oil & gas operator, pipeline operator, or possibly an industrial IoT platform vendor in the energy space. CygNet is heavily used by super-majors and large pipeline companies. Other plausible candidates: a Houston-based industrial data platform (think Seeq-style or a Honeywell/Emerson partner). You don’t need to guess the client name — but mentioning that you understand the Houston energy ecosystem and have actually worked at an integrated oil & gas operator (HPCL is one of India’s largest) lands instantly.

Q: What does Glassdoor say about the WebCreek interview process?
A: Roughly 72% rate the interview experience positively, with average difficulty 2.9/5. Reported flow: a recruiter screen (background, motivation, salary expectations), then a technical interview with a senior engineer typically split into two parts — about an hour of intermediate technical Q&A across SQL, REST APIs, framework knowledge, and architecture, followed by ~45 minutes of live coding. Some candidates also report a client-facing technical interview as a third stage. They’ve been known to ask classic algorithmic questions (e.g. Fibonacci with recursion) but the bulk of the interview is on real-world technologies the candidate has used.

Q: What’s the most likely overall interview structure on May 13 at 11:00 AM CST?
A: Based on the WebCreek pattern + the assessment description: this single 11:00 AM slot is most likely the technical assessment (the “encounter coding challenges” language in the email is the giveaway). It could be a 90–120 minute combined session covering:
15–20 min: Resume walkthrough + behavioral anchors.
30–45 min: Technical Q&A (SCADA, protocols, time-series, APIs, Docker/K8s).
30–60 min: Live coding — likely a SQL window-function problem, a Python string-parsing/date-arithmetic problem, and possibly an async API integration problem.
Have water, a notepad, and your resume printed. Be in a quiet room with reliable internet 15 min early.

Q: What’s the salary range I should know about?
A: Glassdoor shows the WebCreek Houston Senior Backend Python role somewhere in the $76K–$135K band (one listing showed $61K–$105K, another $76K–$135K). For a senior with 12+ years of experience plus on-site Houston relocation, target the upper third — $115K–$135K base is a reasonable ask. Don’t volunteer a number first if you can avoid it; if pushed, anchor with “Based on Houston market data for senior Python developers with industrial automation experience, I’m targeting $120K–$140K base, but I’m flexible based on the total package.” Save salary discussion for HR/recruiter, not the technical interview.

Q: What are WebCreek’s “must-mention” cultural cues?
A: WebCreek loves to talk about: their WebCreek University (in-house training/certifications), their Workcation Program (working from Miami Beach / Times Square as a perk for top performers), their diversity and global team (10+ offices), and their nearshoring promise. If asked “why WebCreek?”, incorporate one of these — “The combination of working with Fortune 500 industrial clients and the global team culture is appealing” — without sounding like a brochure.

Q: What’s my single biggest differentiator?
A: You actually ran a 55-plant LPG network for 12 years, with hands-on SCADA, PLC, automated tank gauging, ERP-integrated maintenance and procurement, and crisis management. The vast majority of “Senior Python Developers” applying for this role have zero plant-floor experience. They’ve read about MQTT in a blog post. You’ve watched a custody-transfer meter go offline at 2 AM during monsoon flooding. Lead with this whenever a question opens the door. The interviewer will remember.

Q: What’s the mistake to avoid?
A: Don’t pitch yourself as a Data Scientist. Your resume currently leads with “Data Scientist | ML Engineer | AI & Analytics Leader.” For this interview, mentally reframe to “12 years building production data and software systems at a Fortune Global 500 oil & gas operator, with Python, SQL, ETL, SCADA/PLC integration, and AI applications layered on top.” Drop the “Data Scientist” identity at the door — they want a Senior Python Developer who knows industrial data. The ML/AI work is gravy, not the entrée.

Q: How do I handle the inevitable “you’re more analytics than backend” pushback?
A: Reframe firmly but without defensiveness:
“My core craft for the last 12 years has been building production Python systems against industrial data — APES is a multi-service Python application with FastAPI-style routing, queueing, async LLM calls, OpenAI rate-limit handling, and AWS deployment. The HP RAG chatbot is a Python backend with hybrid search, FAISS indexing, caching, and a feedback loop, deployed on AWS with Kubernetes. The HPCL forecasting pipeline is a SAP-integrated ETL system that delivers next-day plans across 55 plants on schedule. The analytics work sits on top of those systems — I built the systems first.”
Practice this until it’s natural.

Q: How do I prepare for the live coding section?
A: Three patterns to drill cold (Section L has full code):
SQL window functions for month-over-month analysis — LAG(), DATE_TRUNC, percent change, division-by-zero protection. Should write this in 5–7 minutes without notes.
Python string parsing for time calculations — parsing duration strings like "2h 15m 30s" or "PT2H15M30S" (ISO-8601), converting timestamps across time zones, computing diffs. Be ready to explain datetime vs dateutil vs arrow.
Async API integration — aiohttp or httpx.AsyncClient, gathering parallel calls, normalizing date sequences across sources, JSON serialization with custom types (datetime, Decimal, bytes).
Use Python and think out loud. They’re evaluating reasoning, not just the answer.

Q: How do I handle questions on tech I haven’t used in production?
A: Honest, but bridge to what you have done. Example for OPC-UA:
“I haven’t written an OPC-UA client end-to-end myself — at HPCL we used SCADA stacks where OPC-UA was abstracted by the vendor — but I understand the model: it’s a request-response protocol with an address space, browse/read/write/subscribe semantics, X.509-based security, and built-in information modeling. I’d reach for opcua-asyncio in Python. Where I have direct experience is the data-side: ingesting tag data from custody-transfer meters and tank gauges, normalizing it, and serving it through APIs and dashboards. Happy to walk through that work.”
Never bluff. Always pivot back to a real story.

Q: What questions should I ask them at the end?
A: Pick 3–4 from this list, in this order:
“Can you describe the architecture I’d be stepping into — where does the Python service sit relative to the SCADA platform and the time-series store?”
“What’s the biggest performance or scaling challenge the team is facing right now with the time-series workload?”
“What does the on-call structure look like — given this is industrial data, what’s the SLA expectation?”
“How is the relationship between WebCreek and the end client structured — am I embedded with a single client team or rotating?”
“What does success look like in the first 6 months for this role?”
“What’s the team’s stance on async Python — is the codebase already async-first or is that a migration target?”
These questions show you’re thinking like a senior engineer who’s already evaluating the job.

Q: How do I handle the inevitable “why are you leaving HPCL?” question?
A: Clean, forward-looking, no negativity:
“I spent 12 years at HPCL building data and digital systems across a national plant network — it was an incredible run, including the Best of Best award and the youngest plant manager appointment in company history. I moved to the U.S. on EAD authorization and now I’m at the point where I want to bring that operational data and Python engineering experience to a U.S. industrial company. The Houston energy ecosystem is the natural fit — and a role that combines Python, SCADA integration, and time-series at scale is exactly the work I’ve been doing, just on a different stack.”

Q: What’s the one sentence to land if they ask “why should we hire you?”
A: “I’m a Python developer with 12 years of hands-on plant operations and SCADA experience at a Fortune Global 500 energy company — I understand both sides of the wire: the PLC tags, the historian quirks, the production reliability constraints, and I can write the Python and SQL to make sense of all of it.”
Pause. Smile. Done.

SECTION B — Behavioral & Resume Walkthrough
35 Q&As — STAR-format anchors, all from your real history

Q: Walk me through your background.
A: “I’m a Python developer and analytics engineer with 12 years at Hindustan Petroleum Corporation, a Fortune Global 500 energy company. I spent that time across four LPG plants in India, eventually becoming the youngest plant manager in HPCL’s history. The work always combined three things: industrial operations — SCADA, PLCs, automated tank gauging, custody-transfer measurement — enterprise systems including SAP and JD Edwards ERP, and Python-based data and analytics platforms. I built things like a network-wide demand forecasting pipeline serving 55 plants, a computer vision OCR system for cylinder weight verification at 3,200 cylinders per hour, an automated tender evaluation system using LangChain and OpenAI, and a production RAG chatbot deployed on AWS with Kubernetes for the entire HPCL network. I’m based in Lewisville, TX, on EAD work authorization, and I’m here for an on-site Houston role because I want to bring this operational and engineering experience to a U.S. industrial company.”
That’s about 50 seconds at a normal pace. Trim if asked for shorter.

Q: Tell me about the $7.7M investigation.
A: S — A major upstream supplier filed a $7.7M financial claim against HPCL based on selective gain/loss data, alleging a single root cause for terminal product variance.
T — I was asked to lead the technical investigation and either substantiate or refute the claim using HPCL’s operational records.
A — I pulled 10 years of operational data — measurement logs, dispatch records, temperature/pressure readings, custody-transfer meter calibration history, weighbridge data — from SAP and the plant historians. I built a multivariate correlation analysis in Python (Pandas, statsmodels) showing that terminal gain/loss was a function of all operational variables combined, not the single source the supplier had isolated. I documented the methodology, the data provenance, and the statistical limits of their claim, and presented to senior leadership and legal.
R — The claim was refuted, $7.7M was saved, and I received the HPCL Best of Best award — top 0.25% of 4,000+ officers. More importantly for this interview: the technical core was Python + SQL against multi-source operational time-series data. That’s exactly the work in this JD.

Q: Tell me about APES.
A: S — HPCL procurement evaluation took roughly 2 days per tender, was officer-bandwidth-bound, and had no consistent audit trail.
T — Design and ship an automated procurement evaluation system that cut the cycle and produced a defensible audit trail.
A — Built a Python service using LangChain to orchestrate LLM calls, originally on Anthropic’s API and then migrated to OpenAI’s gpt-4o-mini after rate-limit issues. The system parses incoming bid documents, extracts structured criteria, evaluates against a scoring rubric, routes ambiguous cases through a three-tier human-in-the-loop workflow, and writes a complete audit trail. Containerized, deployed on AWS EC2 + S3, orchestrated with Kubernetes. Pydantic for data validation, LangSmith for tracing, 149 passing unit tests with 13 gated integration tests.
R — Cycle dropped from 2 days to 20 minutes — 98.6% reduction. ~$0.13 per evaluation in LLM cost. Working PDF report generation, 305 LangSmith traces in production logging.
For this interview, the key points to surface: it’s a multi-service Python backend, it deals with async LLM calls and rate-limiting (real-world, not toy), it’s deployed on AWS+K8s, and it has the kind of test discipline a senior backend engineer cares about.

Q: Tell me about the HP Dhruv RAG chatbot.
A: S — HPCL operational, maintenance, procurement, and safety manuals were scattered across PDFs and shared drives. Plant officers spent hours hunting for the right SOP.
T — Build a single natural-language query interface across the corpus, deployed network-wide, with feedback loops for continuous improvement.
A — Python backend using LangChain for orchestration, Groq’s llama-3.3-70b for the LLM, FAISS for vector storage, BM25 for lexical retrieval, hybrid search at 80/20 weighted blend. Frontend in Streamlit. The non-trivial engineering bit: I switched from naive character-based chunking to sentence-aware splitting (RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter with overlap=400) which fixed a B12 error retrieval failure that had been blocking adoption. Cache layer with 7-day TTL plus thumbs-down invalidation so bad answers don’t get served again. Currently 21,344 chunks across three core HPCL PDFs. Repo: Kokkisa/hpcl-rag-chatbot.
R — Production deployment on the MyHPCL enterprise portal, network-wide across all 55 plants. AWS EC2 + SageMaker, Kubernetes orchestration. 400-question RAGAS evaluation pending.
The relevance for WebCreek: it’s a Python backend serving a high-availability industrial enterprise, with caching, a feedback loop, and real production deployment.

Q: Tell me about a difficult debugging story.
A: The Pydantic settings + os.environ propagation bug in APES. S — APES was dropping LangSmith traces sporadically in production. T — Find the root cause without rolling back the deployment. A — Tracked it to pydantic-settings not actually exporting values to os.environ — it loads them into the settings object but doesn’t push them to the process environment, which LangSmith’s auto-tracer reads. Wrote a _propagate_langsmith_to_environ() helper that explicitly sets the env vars after settings load, called it on app startup. R — Trace dropouts went to zero. The lesson: any library that reads from os.environ directly (LangSmith, Datadog tracers, OpenTelemetry exporters) needs explicit propagation if you’re using pydantic-settings. This is a senior-level debugging story — read the docs of both libraries before assuming the integration is automatic.

Q: Walk me through a system you designed end-to-end.
A: The HPCL daily demand forecasting and supply optimization pipeline. S — 55 plants, 3,300+ distributors, daily indent decisions, all done manually with Excel and phone calls. T — Replace it with an automated, network-wide pipeline that delivered next-day recommendations to plant, regional, zone, and HQ by 1100 hrs daily. A — Python forecasting layer (Prophet + SARIMA hybrid for plants with stable history; ETS fallback for sparser series), demand pattern classification using ADI/CV² to choose the right model per series. SAP-integrated ETL — triggered automatically on plant day-end completion event from SAP, pulled the day’s dispatch and stock data, ran the forecast, wrote recommendations back to a PostgreSQL store, and served them through Power BI dashboards plus a dispatch indent file. R — Zero supply disruptions across the 55-plant network over 12 years serving 3,300+ distributors. That’s the metric — it’s an availability/reliability outcome, not a model accuracy outcome.

Q: Tell me about a time you had to work cross-functionally.
A: The OCR-based tare weight automation. S — Cylinder filling at 3,200/hour was using manual encoding from inspectors reading stamped numbers — error-prone, inconsistent, and a known cause of overfill/underfill incidents. T — Replace manual encoding with computer vision OCR at industrial throughput. A — Worked with: plant operations (who set throughput requirements), the maintenance team (who handled camera mounting and lighting), the safety department (who certified the change-of-process), the SAP team (who integrated the new data flow into the master record), and an external CV vendor (whose stack we extended). I owned the Python/OpenCV/TensorFlow OCR pipeline and the integration testing. R — 99%+ read accuracy at full industrial throughput, eliminated the manual encoding error category. The cross-functional bit: this isn’t a project a software engineer can ship alone — it’s a software engineer who can stand on a plant floor at 3 AM during commissioning and talk to the operations supervisor in their language.

Q: Describe a time you disagreed with a stakeholder.
A: The discount engine. Senior officers had been calculating distributor discounts manually with significant variance — there was political resistance to standardizing because variance was a lever some used. My position: standardize using a regression + CLTV + market basket framework. Their position: “the manual flexibility is feature, not bug.” What I did: built a side-by-side simulation showing that the manual model produced three distributors in identical situations getting wildly different discounts, and reconstructed the standardized model’s outputs against historical winners so they could see continuity. Result: the standardized engine was adopted; “edge case” overrides were retained but logged. The lesson — disagreement is fine; bring data and a concession.

Q: Tell me about a time you took initiative.
A: The carousel analytics platform. No one asked for it. I was sitting at a plant watching shift handovers being done with paper logs, and the per-filling-head deviation data — which actually explains 90% of overfill issues — was buried in end-of-shift PDFs nobody read. I built a Flask + PostgreSQL + Plotly application in evenings and weekends over six weeks, then ran it as a pilot at one plant. The plant manager loved it, regional ops asked for it, and within a year it was network-wide as a real-time platform. The takeaway for the interview: senior engineers don’t wait for a ticket — they build the thing that’s obviously needed and get adoption by demonstrating value.

Q: Tell me about a time you had to learn something new fast.
A: LangChain + RAG for the HP Dhruv chatbot. I had Python and ML/NLP experience but had never shipped a RAG system end-to-end. Two weeks of focused work: read the LangChain docs, watched the FAISS deep-dives, built three throwaway prototypes (basic RAG → with BM25 hybrid → with caching/feedback), ran failure-mode analysis on each, then committed to the architecture for the production version. The lesson — read the source of the libraries you’re using, not just the tutorials. The B12 chunking bug I mentioned earlier — I only caught it by reading the LangChain RecursiveCharacterTextSplitter source and realizing the default separators didn’t preserve sentence boundaries.

Q: Tell me about a time something went wrong in production.
A: The Kondapalli flood — August 2024, 72-hour crisis. The plant was inundated, automated tank gauging on three custody-transfer tanks went offline, the SCADA HMI was unreachable from the central control room, and we were running on backup generator power. I ran the on-site crisis response: switched to manual dipping with logged, signed paper records (still SAP-compatible because we had the templates pre-built), coordinated with the central team to extrapolate backup data from upstream pipeline meters, and brought ATG back online incrementally as power and dryness allowed. Zero injuries, zero supply disruption to the customer base. The interview takeaway: industrial software doesn’t fail in isolated test environments — it fails when the building is flooded. A senior engineer designs for that.

Q: What’s your biggest weakness?
A: Avoid the cliché answer. Try:
“I tend to over-invest in writing comprehensive documentation when starting a new project, sometimes at the cost of getting an early prototype in front of users. I’ve been correcting it by setting myself a forced timebox — ‘first prototype in 5 days, even ugly’ — before I let myself write the architecture doc. The HP RAG chatbot is a recent example: I built three throwaway prototypes before committing to the architecture, then wrote the docs.”
Honest, growth-oriented, doesn’t sound rehearsed.

Q: What’s your biggest strength?
A: “I can sit between the plant floor and the codebase. I’ve watched a SCADA tag go bad at 2 AM during a commissioning, and I’ve also debugged Pydantic propagation bugs in a Kubernetes deployment. Most software engineers can do one of those things; most plant managers can do the other. The combination is what I bring.”

Q: Why are you interested in the energy industry?
A: “I’ve spent 12 years in it — most of my professional identity is tied to it. The Houston energy ecosystem is the natural place to continue: it’s where the most interesting industrial data engineering problems are, the data volumes are real, the reliability requirements are real, and the field is still very much in the middle of its IT/OT convergence. I want to be where that work is happening.”

Q: Why on-site Houston when you live in Lewisville?
A: “Lewisville to Houston is a 4-hour drive, and I’m prepared to relocate. On-site is fine for the right role — I’ve spent 12 years on plant floors, so the daily-commute model is what I know. I’d target a Houston move within 30–45 days of starting, depending on lease handoff.”
Don’t hedge. Senior candidates commit.

Q: How do you handle on-call?
A: “At HPCL the model was different — as plant manager I was effectively always on-call for safety incidents and I was reachable 24/7 for the regional team. For software on-call, I want to understand the structure — page volume, severity tiers, runbooks, and the team’s rotation philosophy — but the principle is the same: when production is down, I’m there. I’d just want to know what ‘production down’ means in this context.”

Q: Tell me about your team management experience.
A: 435+ personnel and a $3.9M annual budget at the largest plant. The relevant translation for a software role: I’ve managed cross-functional teams (operations, maintenance, safety, contractor) under tight reliability SLAs. For an IC software role, surface the individual project leadership angle: led the design and rollout of APES, the RAG chatbot, the carousel platform, the predictive maintenance system. People work, but at engineering scale.

Q: How do you handle ambiguity?
A: The HP RAG chatbot project started ambiguous — the ask was “build us something that helps officers find SOPs faster.” Not a spec. What I did: spent the first week just shadowing officers, finding the actual moments they got stuck, then prototyped against those specific failure modes. The architecture (hybrid search, caching, feedback loop) all came from observed pain. The lesson: when the spec is ambiguous, the spec is in the user’s day, not in the document.

Q: What does success look like for you?
A: “In the first 90 days: a clean understanding of the existing pipeline architecture, the data flow from SCADA to the time-series store, and the API surface. I’d want to ship at least one meaningful improvement — a query optimization, a new endpoint, a debugging tool. By 6 months: I’d want to own a service end-to-end and be the person the team turns to for SCADA-to-Python integration questions. Long term: I want the work I ship to be operationally trusted — the kind of system the on-call team isn’t worried about.”

Q: How do you stay current technically?
A: Honest answer: I read source code, not just tutorials. I follow specific GitHub repos (LangChain, FastAPI, opcua-asyncio, TimescaleDB), I run small experiments — the JobRadar pipeline, PantriPal, the AP EAMCET extraction work, the FARMos paper — to test new techniques in low-stakes contexts before bringing them to production. And I write — github.com/Kokkisa has the trail.

Q: Tell me about a time you mentored someone.
A: At HPCL I onboarded several young officers across plants — typical pattern was a six-month rotation. The technique I used: never give the answer. Give the framework, ask them to come back with options, then pressure-test their reasoning. Specific: trained an officer at Mangalore on the spare parts ABC/VED/JIT classification — instead of teaching her the formula, I had her audit a real warehouse and discover where the existing classification was wrong, then derive the correction. Six months later she was running spare parts for the region.

Q: How do you balance speed vs. quality?
A: “For internal tools and prototypes, ship fast and iterate — I built the carousel platform in 6 weeks of evenings as a working prototype before architecting it properly. For production industrial systems where downtime has real consequences, quality first — the demand forecasting pipeline took 4 months because zero supply disruptions across 55 plants was the SLA. The reframe I use: speed is a function of reversibility. Reversible decisions, ship fast. Irreversible decisions touching production, slow down.”

Q: Why should we hire you over a candidate with 5 years of pure Python backend experience?
A: “They’re probably faster than me on certain framework-specific patterns — and that’s fine, I can catch up on those quickly. What they don’t have, and what’s hard to acquire on the job, is the operational instinct that comes from running plants. When the time-series store starts dropping writes, I know what ‘plant just had a power blip’ looks like in the data. When the SCADA tag goes ‘bad quality,’ I know the seven things that could cause it. That intuition saves on-call hours, prevents bad incidents, and shapes design choices in ways a pure-software career doesn’t teach. For a senior role on an industrial system, that’s the bet.”

Q: Describe your code review philosophy.
A: Two things matter: does it work, and will the next person understand it. I look for: explicit error handling around external calls (network, DB, third-party APIs), tests on the boundary cases not just the happy path, clear function and variable names, and a docstring that explains why not just what. I push back on premature abstraction. I’ll approve a “this is ugly but correct” PR if there’s a tracking ticket for the cleanup; I’ll block a “this is elegant but doesn’t handle the timeout” PR.

Q: What’s your testing philosophy?
A: “For backend Python: pytest, parametrize aggressively, mock external services at the boundary (not at the call site), and have at least one integration test per public endpoint. For data pipelines: contract tests on the input schema, snapshot tests on the output, and a ‘random row sampling’ test that runs against a representative slice. APES has 149 passing unit tests and 13 integration tests gated behind an API key — that’s the pattern I’d bring.”

Q: How do you handle technical debt?
A: Two ledgers: one for “must fix before next release” (security, broken tests, blocking bugs), one for “should fix in the next 90 days” (performance hotspots, ugly code, deprecated dependencies). I never let the second ledger grow without a budget — if it does, the team is shipping faster than it’s sustaining, and that’s a leadership conversation. The trap to avoid: refactoring for elegance instead of fixing for correctness.

Q: What’s a project you’re proud of that you didn’t put on the resume?
A: The carousel analytics platform. It started as a personal project on weekends — no budget, no mandate, no team. It became network-wide. I’m proud of it not because of the tech but because it was the first time I proved to myself I could build, sell, and scale something inside a Fortune 500 organization without anyone asking me to.

Q: What’s the hardest technical decision you’ve made?
A: The APES stack switch from Anthropic to OpenAI. Anthropic was working in dev — APES had been built around it — but Tier 1 rate limits were causing failures in load testing. I had two options: provision higher tier (cost), or migrate to OpenAI’s gpt-4o-mini (effort). I chose the migration because it removed the dependency on a specific provider tier I’d have to keep buying up. Two days of work to migrate, then 305 production traces and ~$0.13 per evaluation — same quality, lower cost, no rate-limit anxiety. The lesson: when a constraint is structural, fix it; don’t keep paying around it.

Q: How do you approach learning a new codebase?
A: Three passes. First pass: README, top-level architecture doc, the entry points (main.py, the CLI, the API routes). Don’t read the code yet — get the shape. Second pass: trace one happy path end-to-end. Pick a request, follow it through the code, write down the call stack. Third pass: read the tests. Tests reveal intent better than the code does — what the team thinks should be true. Then I’m ready to make changes.

Q: What are you reading or learning right now?
A: “I’m working through TimescaleDB’s continuous aggregates documentation and the InfluxDB 3 Core release notes — figuring out the trade-offs for a high-cardinality industrial time-series workload is something I want to be sharp on. On the engineering side, I’m reading Designing Data-Intensive Applications by Kleppmann for the third time — it’s one of those books where each pass surfaces different things.”
Show curiosity, not credentialism.

Q: Tell me about a time you made a mistake.
A: The first version of the carousel platform had a per-filling-head deviation calculation that was technically correct but masked a class of slow-creep faults. An operations supervisor at the pilot plant flagged it after two months. I rebuilt the deviation logic to use a rolling z-score against per-machine baseline rather than a global mean, retroactively reprocessed the historical data, and pushed a new version. The mistake taught me — domain experts will catch what your tests won’t. Build a feedback channel from day one.

Q: How do you make decisions under pressure?
A: The flood crisis: I had no time for a full risk assessment. The framework I used (and still use): identify the irreversible failure modes first (people getting hurt, custody-transfer measurement gap that triggers a regulatory issue), eliminate those by any means necessary, then optimize on everything else. In industrial software the parallel is: an outage in production isn’t a leisurely RCA exercise — it’s “stop the bleeding, then find the cause.”

Q: What are your salary expectations?
A: See Q6. Default response if pushed:
“Based on Houston market data for senior Python developers with industrial automation experience, I’m targeting $120K–$140K base, but I’m flexible based on the total package — equity, bonus, healthcare, the on-call structure, relocation support. Happy to dive into specifics with the recruiter.”
Don’t overthink this in the technical interview. Punt politely.

Q: Are you authorized to work in the U.S.?
A: “Yes — I have EAD authorization and require no sponsorship. I’m immediately available.”
That’s the whole answer. Don’t elaborate unless asked.

Q: Anything else we should know?
A: “Just one thing — and I want to make sure it doesn’t get lost in a technical interview. I’ve spent 12 years inside an integrated oil & gas operator at the plant level. If you’re hiring for an industrial Python role at a Houston energy client, that operational context is what I bring on top of the engineering. I’m not looking to be a generalist Python developer who occasionally gets to touch SCADA data — I’m looking to be the person on the team who knows the data because they’ve watched it being generated.”
Then stop talking.

SECTION C — Python Core (Senior-Level)
40 Q&As — these are bread-and-butter questions you must answer fluently

Q: What’s the difference between __new__ and __init__?
A: __new__ is the constructor — it creates the instance and returns it. __init__ is the initializer — it sets up the already-created instance. You override __new__ rarely (singletons, immutable subclasses like custom int or tuple); you override __init__ constantly. __new__ runs before __init__ and must return an instance for __init__ to be called. If __new__ returns something other than an instance of the class, __init__ is skipped entirely.

Q: Explain the GIL.
A: The Global Interpreter Lock is a mutex in CPython that ensures only one thread executes Python bytecode at a time. It exists because CPython’s memory management (reference counting) isn’t thread-safe. Practical implications: CPU-bound multithreading in Python doesn’t actually run in parallel — for that you need multiprocessing or native extensions that release the GIL (NumPy, Pandas, Cython modules). I/O-bound multithreading does benefit because the GIL is released during blocking I/O calls. Async (asyncio) is single-threaded but still benefits from cooperative I/O. In Python 3.13+ there’s an experimental free-threaded build that disables the GIL, but it’s not yet the default.

Q: Async vs threading vs multiprocessing — when do you use which?
A: Threading: I/O-bound work where you want shared memory and the libraries you’re using are blocking but release the GIL during I/O (requests, file I/O, DB drivers). Asyncio: I/O-bound work where you control the libraries — aiohttp, asyncpg, httpx.AsyncClient — and you want to handle thousands of concurrent connections cheaply. Multiprocessing: CPU-bound work — image processing, ML inference, large pandas transforms — where you actually need parallel CPU. For an industrial data pipeline, the typical mix is asyncio for the API layer and ingestion, threading for blocking DB drivers if you’re stuck with them, and multiprocessing only for genuinely heavy compute.

Q: How does asyncio’s event loop actually work?
A: The event loop maintains a queue of coroutines (Task objects). When a coroutine hits await on an awaitable that isn’t ready, it yields control back to the loop, which picks the next ready task. The loop also watches file descriptors via select/epoll/kqueue for I/O readiness, and timers for sleep/timeout. Critical mental model: async is cooperative. A coroutine that runs CPU-bound code without yielding will block every other coroutine. That’s why you offload CPU work to loop.run_in_executor() (a thread or process pool).

Q: What’s a coroutine vs. a generator?
A: A generator is a function with yield — it produces values on demand. A coroutine is a function with async def — it produces awaitables and is driven by an event loop. Mechanically they share heritage (async def was originally implemented on top of generators with yield from), but semantically they’re different: a generator is iterated, a coroutine is awaited. In modern Python, treat them as separate concepts — don’t use yield inside async def for control flow.

Q: Explain Python’s memory model — references, copies, mutability.
A: Variables in Python are names bound to objects. Assignment binds a name; it doesn’t copy. Mutability is a property of the object, not the binding. Lists, dicts, sets are mutable; tuples, strings, ints, frozensets are immutable. The classic gotcha is mutable default arguments — def f(x=[]) creates the list once at function definition time, so all calls share it. Use def f(x=None): x = x or [] instead. copy.copy() is shallow; copy.deepcopy() recurses. For a senior interview, also know: small ints (−5 to 256) and short interned strings are cached, so is can give surprising True results.

Q: What are decorators and how do they work?
A: A decorator is a callable that takes a function (or class) and returns a replacement. @decorator is sugar for f = decorator(f). Use cases: logging, timing, retry, caching, auth, registering handlers (FastAPI, Flask use this for route registration). Key gotcha: decorators replace the function object, so __name__, __doc__, and signature are lost unless you use functools.wraps. Always wrap your decorators with functools.wraps — debuggers, OpenAPI generators, and traceback printers all depend on it.

Q: Show me a parameterized decorator.
A: import functools

def retry(max_attempts=3, exceptions=(Exception,)):
    def decorator(func):
        @functools.wraps(func)
        def wrapper(*args, **kwargs):
            last_exc = None
            for attempt in range(max_attempts):
                try:
                    return func(*args, **kwargs)
                except exceptions as e:
                    last_exc = e
            raise last_exc
        return wrapper
    return decorator

@retry(max_attempts=5, exceptions=(ConnectionError, TimeoutError))
def fetch_scada_tag(tag_id: str) -> float:
    ...
Three nested levels: the outer takes the decorator’s args, the middle takes the function, the inner is the actual wrapper.

Q: Explain context managers and the with statement.
A: A context manager is an object with __enter__ and __exit__. with calls __enter__ on entry, __exit__ on exit (even if an exception is raised). Use cases: file handles, DB connections, locks, timers, transaction scopes. For ad-hoc context managers, use contextlib.contextmanager:
from contextlib import contextmanager
import time

@contextmanager
def timer(name: str):
    start = time.perf_counter()
    try:
        yield
    finally:
        print(f"{name} took {time.perf_counter() - start:.3f}s")

with timer("forecast"):
    run_forecast()
For async, use __aenter__/__aexit__ and @asynccontextmanager.

Q: What’s __slots__ and when do you use it?
A: __slots__ declares a fixed set of attributes for a class, replacing the per-instance __dict__ with a more compact storage. Saves memory (~40–50% per instance) and gives faster attribute access. When to use: classes you instantiate millions of times — sensor readings, financial ticks, graph nodes. When not to use: anything you need to dynamically add attributes to, anything that needs __dict__ (some serialization libraries), inheritance hierarchies where parents don’t have __slots__. Pydantic V2’s model_config = ConfigDict(slots=True) gives you this for Pydantic models.

Q: Explain Python’s import system.
A: When Python sees import x, it searches sys.modules first (cached), then sys.path directories, then any meta-path finders. If found, it executes the module’s top level and binds the result. Gotchas: circular imports (A imports B imports A) usually fail because A is half-loaded when B starts; solve with deferred imports or restructuring. Implicit relative imports were removed in Python 3 — use explicit relative (from .module import x) or absolute imports. For a backend codebase, prefer absolute imports for clarity.

Q: What’s the difference between is and ==?
A: is tests identity (same object in memory); == tests equality (calls __eq__). Use is only for None, True, False, and singletons. Never use is to compare values — 1000 is 1000 may or may not be True depending on caching. Linters flag this for a reason.

Q: Explain Python’s type hints. Are they enforced?
A: Type hints (PEP 484) annotate function signatures and variables. They’re not enforced at runtime by default — Python doesn’t check them. Tools like mypy, pyright, and pyre do static analysis. Pydantic does enforce them at runtime by validating inputs. FastAPI builds OpenAPI schemas, validation, and serialization off type hints. Modern Python (3.9+) supports list[int], dict[str, float] natively without from typing import. For a senior role, expect Optional[X] written as X | None (PEP 604), Annotated[X, ...] for FastAPI parameter metadata, and Protocol for structural typing.

Q: What’s a Pydantic model? Why use it?
A: Pydantic provides data classes with automatic validation, serialization, and JSON schema generation. You declare fields with type hints, Pydantic validates inputs at construction, and you get .model_dump() / .model_dump_json() for free. Why it matters for industrial APIs: sensor data, tag metadata, config — all of it has constraints (positive floats, enum-bound statuses, ISO-8601 timestamps). Pydantic enforces them at the boundary so the rest of your code can assume correctness. Pydantic V2 is dramatically faster than V1 — it’s built on a Rust core (pydantic-core).

Q: Show me a Pydantic model for a SCADA tag reading.
A: from datetime import datetime
from decimal import Decimal
from enum import Enum
from pydantic import BaseModel, Field, ConfigDict

class TagQuality(str, Enum):
    GOOD = "good"
    BAD = "bad"
    UNCERTAIN = "uncertain"

class TagReading(BaseModel):
    model_config = ConfigDict(frozen=True, slots=True)

    tag_id: str = Field(..., min_length=1, max_length=128)
    timestamp: datetime
    value: Decimal = Field(..., decimal_places=4)
    quality: TagQuality = TagQuality.GOOD
    unit: str | None = None

reading = TagReading(
    tag_id="PT-101.PV",
    timestamp="2026-05-08T14:30:00Z",
    value="123.4567"
)
print(reading.model_dump_json())
frozen=True makes it hashable (cacheable), slots=True saves memory.

Q: What’s the difference between a list and a tuple — beyond mutability?
A: Tuples are hashable when their contents are hashable, so they work as dict keys and set members. Tuples have a memory footprint advantage (one allocation for the whole tuple). Tuples are slightly faster to construct. Convention: use tuples for fixed-length records (a coordinate, a (key, value) pair), lists for homogeneous variable-length sequences. For a senior interview, also know namedtuple (from collections) for self-documenting tuples and typing.NamedTuple for typed versions.

Q: What’s a generator expression and when do you use it?
A: (x*2 for x in range(1000000)) — like a list comprehension but lazy. Use it when you only need to iterate once and you don’t need to materialize the result. Memory cost is O(1) instead of O(n). Critical for large data — never write sum([x for x in iter]) when sum(x for x in iter) is the same thing without the temporary list.

Q: Explain *args and **kwargs.
A: *args packs positional arguments into a tuple; **kwargs packs keyword arguments into a dict. In a function signature: def f(a, *args, b, **kwargs) — b is a keyword-only argument (you can’t pass it positionally because *args ate the positional slots). Senior touch: use * with no name as a separator — def f(a, *, b) — to force b to be keyword-only without accepting *args.

Q: What’s the difference between @staticmethod, @classmethod, and instance methods?
A: Instance method: takes self, has access to instance state. Class method: takes cls, has access to class state, often used for alternate constructors (from_dict, from_json). Static method: takes neither, just a function namespaced inside the class. Prefer module-level functions over @staticmethod unless namespace organization is genuinely useful.

Q: What’s an ABC (Abstract Base Class)?
A: from abc import ABC, abstractmethod. Defines an interface that subclasses must implement. Modern alternative: typing.Protocol for structural typing — duck-typed but checked statically. For a senior backend role, prefer Protocol for “anything that has these methods” interfaces and ABCs only when you need a real inheritance hierarchy with shared logic.

Q: What’s the difference between dict.get() and dict[key]?
A: dict[key] raises KeyError if the key is missing. dict.get(key) returns None (or a custom default). For senior code: use dict[key] when the key must exist (you want the failure to be loud), dict.get() when missing is a normal case. Don’t conflate these — silencing real errors is one of the most common bug sources in junior code.

Q: Explain __getitem__, __setitem__, __iter__.
A: These dunders make an object behave like a container. __getitem__(self, key) enables obj[key]. __setitem__(self, key, value) enables obj[key] = value. __iter__(self) enables for x in obj. If you only implement __getitem__ with integer indices, Python falls back to using it for iteration too — this is why old-style sequence types worked. For modern code, implement __iter__ explicitly.

Q: What does the yield from syntax do?
A: yield from iterable delegates iteration to a sub-generator. It’s syntactic sugar for for x in iterable: yield x, but it also propagates send(), throw(), and return values cleanly. Use case: composing generators, recursing through tree structures.

Q: What’s a metaclass?
A: A metaclass is the class of a class. type is the default metaclass — class Foo is shorthand for Foo = type(&#39;Foo&#39;, (), {}). Custom metaclasses control class creation: validate methods, register subclasses, inject behavior. When to use: almost never. Prefer class decorators or __init_subclass__ for the same goals with less mystery. Pydantic V1 used metaclasses heavily; V2 dropped them in favor of code generation.

Q: Explain the difference between pickle and json.
A: pickle serializes arbitrary Python objects (functions, classes, custom types) to a binary format. json serializes a restricted set of types (str, int, float, bool, None, list, dict) to text. Pickle is dangerous — unpickling untrusted data is a code execution vulnerability. Use JSON for anything crossing a trust boundary. For internal caching of numpy arrays or pandas DataFrames, prefer Parquet or Arrow over pickle.

Q: What’s a dataclass and when do you use it?
A: @dataclass (from dataclasses) generates __init__, __repr__, __eq__, and optionally __hash__ from class annotations. Lightweight, no validation, no serialization beyond asdict(). Use dataclass for internal records. Use Pydantic for anything crossing an API boundary because you need validation. They’re not competitors — they have different jobs.

Q: What’s the difference between == for two NumPy arrays vs. two lists?
A: For lists, [1,2] == [1,2] returns a single boolean. For NumPy arrays, np.array([1,2]) == np.array([1,2]) returns an element-wise boolean array — array([True, True]). To get a single boolean, use .all() or np.array_equal(). This trips up people writing data validation against NumPy.

Q: Show me a one-line list comprehension that flattens a 2D list.
A: flat = [x for row in matrix for x in row]
The order of the for clauses reads left-to-right, like nested loops.

Q: How does Python’s garbage collection work?
A: Two mechanisms. Reference counting (primary) — every object has a refcount; when it hits zero, the object is freed immediately. Cyclic GC (secondary) — handles cycles where two objects reference each other. Runs periodically based on allocation thresholds. For most code, refcounting is enough. The cyclic GC matters for long-running processes with object graphs (like ORMs or event loops) where you want to tune gc.set_threshold() or use weakref to break cycles.

Q: What’s weakref and when do you use it?
A: weakref.ref(obj) creates a reference that doesn’t increment the refcount. The reference becomes invalid when the object is garbage collected. Use cases: caches that shouldn’t prevent collection, observer patterns, breaking reference cycles. weakref.WeakValueDictionary is the practical workhorse.

Q: How do you profile a Python application?
A: Several tools, different layers. cProfile for function-level CPU profiling. line_profiler for line-by-line. memory_profiler for memory. py-spy for sampling profilers that work on running processes (no code change needed — critical for production). For async code, scalene is excellent. For a senior role, also know tracemalloc for tracking memory allocations across snapshots.

Q: What’s functools.lru_cache and when do you use it?
A: A decorator that memoizes a function’s return values up to a max size (LRU eviction). Use for pure functions with hashable arguments and expensive computation. Don’t use for functions with side effects, mutable arguments, or where memory pressure matters. For async functions, use async-lru (third-party) — lru_cache doesn’t work on coroutines. For class methods that need caching, use functools.cached_property instead.

Q: Explain asyncio.gather vs asyncio.as_completed.
A: gather(*coros) runs the coroutines concurrently and returns results in input order, only after all complete. as_completed(coros) returns an iterator that yields each coroutine’s result as it completes — order varies. Use gather when you need all results to proceed. Use as_completed when you want to process results as they arrive (e.g. for streaming responses or UI updates). For error handling: gather propagates the first exception unless you pass return_exceptions=True.

Q: Show me an async function that fetches multiple URLs in parallel.
A: import asyncio
import httpx

async def fetch(client: httpx.AsyncClient, url: str) -> dict:
    response = await client.get(url, timeout=10.0)
    response.raise_for_status()
    return response.json()

async def fetch_all(urls: list[str]) -> list[dict]:
    async with httpx.AsyncClient() as client:
        tasks = [fetch(client, u) for u in urls]
        return await asyncio.gather(*tasks, return_exceptions=True)

results = asyncio.run(fetch_all(["https://api1/x", "https://api2/y"]))
Reuse a single AsyncClient (connection pooling). return_exceptions=True so one bad URL doesn’t kill the whole batch.

Q: What’s asyncio.Semaphore for?
A: Limit concurrency. If you have 1000 URLs to fetch but only want 10 in flight at once:
sem = asyncio.Semaphore(10)

async def fetch_limited(client, url):
    async with sem:
        return await client.get(url)
Critical for API integration where the upstream has rate limits. APES uses this pattern around its OpenAI calls.

Q: How do you handle exceptions in async code?
A: Inside a coroutine, normal try/except works. Across gather, exceptions surface at the gather call. Across create_task, exceptions are silently captured in the task — you must await task or check task.exception() to surface them. Common bug: spawning background tasks with asyncio.create_task(coro) and never awaiting; if the task raises, you get a “Task exception was never retrieved” warning at GC time but no immediate failure. Always either await tasks or set an exception handler with task.add_done_callback.

Q: What’s aiohttp vs httpx?
A: Both are async HTTP clients. aiohttp is older, async-only, and more configurable. httpx supports both sync and async with the same API, has HTTP/2 support, and a more modern feel. For a new project, default to httpx. For an existing aiohttp codebase, stay with it. Both pool connections, both support timeouts, both can stream.

Q: Show me a context manager for an async DB connection.
A: from contextlib import asynccontextmanager
import asyncpg

@asynccontextmanager
async def db_transaction(pool: asyncpg.Pool):
    conn = await pool.acquire()
    tr = conn.transaction()
    await tr.start()
    try:
        yield conn
        await tr.commit()
    except Exception:
        await tr.rollback()
        raise
    finally:
        await pool.release(conn)

async with db_transaction(pool) as conn:
    await conn.execute("INSERT INTO readings ...")
The try/except/finally ensures rollback on error and release in all cases.

Q: How do you structure a large Python project?
A: Domain-oriented packaging, not type-oriented. Bad: models/, services/, controllers/ (Java-ism). Good: ingestion/, forecasting/, dashboard/ — each with its own internal structure. At the top level: pyproject.toml, src/<package>/, tests/, docs/. Use pyproject.toml (PEP 621) for project metadata. Pin Python version. Lock dependencies (uv.lock, poetry.lock, or pip-tools). Run mypy --strict in CI. Format with ruff format. Lint with ruff check.

Q: What’s uv and why are people excited about it?
A: uv is a Rust-based Python package manager (Astral, the same team as ruff). It’s a drop-in replacement for pip and pip-tools, often 10–100× faster. It manages virtual environments, locks dependencies, and runs tools. For a 2026 Python project I’d reach for uv first; poetry is still solid but slower; pip directly is fine for trivial scripts. Be ready to discuss it — it’s come up in many recent senior interviews.

SECTION D — SCADA & Industrial Automation
40 Q&As — your home turf. Make this section bulletproof.

Q: What is SCADA and what’s its role in industrial operations?
A: SCADA — Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition — is the software stack that sits between field devices (sensors, PLCs, RTUs, valves, motors) and human operators. It does four things: acquires data from field devices on a polling or event-driven basis, stores historical data in a historian, visualizes real-time and historical state on HMI screens, and enables control — operators can issue commands (open a valve, change a setpoint) through the SCADA. Modern SCADA also integrates with MES (Manufacturing Execution Systems) and ERP for production reporting, batch records, and inventory.

Q: Walk me through a typical SCADA architecture from sensor to operator.
A: Bottom up: sensor (pressure transmitter, flow meter) → PLC or RTU (reads the sensor on a fast scan cycle, runs local control logic) → field network (Modbus, EtherNet/IP, PROFINET) → SCADA server / I/O server (polls or subscribes to PLC tags via OPC-UA, DNP3, or proprietary drivers) → historian (stores time-series data with compression) → HMI client (operator screens; reads from SCADA server). Layered on top: alarms, reports, batch tracking, and northbound integrations to MES/ERP.

Q: What are the major SCADA platforms in oil & gas?
A: Ignition (Inductive Automation) — Java-based, web-deployed, OPC-UA centric, increasingly popular in upstream and midstream. CygNet (Weatherford) — purpose-built for oil & gas, especially common in pipeline SCADA, super-majors, and large independents. Wonderware / AVEVA System Platform — older industry workhorse, Windows-centric. WinCC (Siemens) — strong in plants with Siemens PLCs. OSIsoft PI (now AVEVA PI) — actually a historian, not full SCADA, but often paired with one. iFix / Proficy (GE Digital) — older, declining footprint.

Q: The JD specifically mentions Ignition, Wonderware, WinCC, and CygNet. What do you know about each?
A: Ignition — Inductive Automation, gateway-based architecture, OPC-UA built in, uses Jython for scripting (Python 2-era syntax inside the gateway). Unlimited client licensing model. Strong in oilfield because of cost. Wonderware (AVEVA System Platform) — older Windows-based, ArchestrA object model, MSSQL backend. Strong in process plants. WinCC — Siemens, tight integration with S7 PLCs, used heavily where Siemens hardware dominates. CygNet — Weatherford, oil & gas-specific, “.NET stack, custom HMI builder (Canvas), supports MQTT and OPC-UA, has its own messaging system, used by 100+ O&G companies for upstream and pipeline. For this Houston role, CygNet is the most likely platform you’ll integrate with.

Q: What’s a PLC and how is it different from a regular computer?
A: PLC — Programmable Logic Controller. A ruggedized industrial controller that runs a deterministic scan cycle: read inputs → execute logic → write outputs → communicate, typically every 10–100 ms. Built for harsh environments (vibration, temperature, EMI), real-time guarantees, and high reliability. Programmed in IEC 61131-3 languages: Ladder Logic, Function Block Diagram, Structured Text, Sequential Function Chart, Instruction List. Major vendors: Allen-Bradley (Rockwell), Siemens, Schneider, Mitsubishi, Omron. Critical difference from a regular computer: PLCs prioritize determinism over throughput — a Linux server can be 1000× faster on a single computation but can’t guarantee a 10 ms cycle.

Q: What’s an RTU and how is it different from a PLC?
A: RTU — Remote Terminal Unit. Functionally similar to a PLC but optimized for remote, low-power, often unattended deployment. Common in pipelines and oilfield where the controller sits in a remote pad with cellular or satellite backhaul. RTUs typically have built-in SCADA protocol support (DNP3, Modbus over radio), wide-temperature operation, and lower scan rates than PLCs (100 ms to several seconds). The line between PLC and RTU has blurred — many vendors sell devices labeled as both.

Q: What’s a historian and why isn’t a regular database good enough?
A: A historian is a specialized time-series database optimized for the industrial data pattern: append-only writes, billions of points, queries by tag and time range, with built-in interpolation, downsampling, and compression specifically tuned for sensor data (e.g. swinging-door compression). OSIsoft PI is the canonical example; CygNet has its own embedded historian; Honeywell Uniformance is another. Why not Postgres: a B-tree index on timestamp doesn’t handle billions of rows efficiently, you’d have to write your own compression and downsampling, and you don’t get the protocol-level integration with PLCs/SCADA that historians have out of the box. TimescaleDB closes a lot of this gap but doesn’t replicate the deep SCADA integrations.

Q: What’s a tag in SCADA?
A: A tag is a named data point — a value being read from or written to a field device. A tag has: a name (e.g. WELL_5.PT_101.PV for pressure transmitter 101’s process value at well 5), a current value, a timestamp, a quality indicator (good/bad/uncertain), an engineering unit, and optionally configured alarms and historical retention rules. SCADA systems typically track tens of thousands to millions of tags. The tag namespace structure is critical for performance and operator usability.

Q: What’s the OSI model relevance for industrial protocols?
A: Most industrial protocols run on Ethernet (Layer 2), use TCP or UDP (Layer 4), and define their own application protocol (Layer 7) — Modbus TCP, EtherNet/IP, DNP3 over IP, OPC-UA. Some protocols are purely physical/data-link — Modbus RTU runs over RS-485 serial, no TCP/IP. For a Python integration role, you’ll mostly work above Layer 4 — opening sockets, sending bytes, parsing responses — but understanding that Modbus/RTU vs Modbus/TCP frames are different (CRC vs MBAP header) saves debugging hours.

Q: What’s the difference between IT and OT, and what does IT/OT convergence mean?
A: IT — Information Technology — corporate networks, business apps, ERP, email, data warehouses. OT — Operational Technology — plant control networks, PLCs, SCADA, HMIs, the systems that physically run the plant. Historically isolated by air-gap or by the Purdue model network segmentation. IT/OT convergence is the trend (last 10 years, accelerating) of bringing OT data into IT systems for analytics and ML, and IT-style tooling (Linux, Python, Docker, cloud) into OT. The role you’re interviewing for sits squarely in this convergence — Python services consuming SCADA data and serving it through cloud-native pipelines.

Q: What’s the Purdue model?
A: A reference architecture that segments industrial networks into levels: Level 0 (sensors and actuators), Level 1 (PLCs and RTUs), Level 2 (SCADA, HMI), Level 3 (MES, plant historian), Level 3.5 (DMZ between OT and IT), Level 4 (corporate IT — ERP, business analytics), Level 5 (enterprise/internet). Firewalls between layers, with strictest controls between Level 3.5 and below. Modern architectures (Industry 4.0, ISA-95) are loosening this somewhat, but Purdue is still the cybersecurity baseline.

Q: What’s an HMI?
A: Human-Machine Interface — the operator-facing screens of a SCADA system. Shows tank levels, valve states, pump statuses, alarms. Operators can issue commands through the HMI. Modern HMIs are increasingly web-based (Ignition Perspective, CygNet Thin Web Client) replacing the older Windows native clients. For a Python developer working alongside HMI, your typical job is to provide data through APIs that HMI dashboards or analytics layers consume.

Q: What’s a SCADA alarm and how does it differ from a notification?
A: An alarm is a real-time indication that a process variable has crossed a configured threshold (a tank level dropped below 10%, a pump trip occurred). Alarms have priorities (critical, high, medium, low), require operator acknowledgment, and are logged for compliance. Alarm management is a discipline (ISA-18.2 standard) — bad alarm hygiene means operators get hundreds of alarms an hour and start ignoring them. A notification is a softer signal — a maintenance reminder, a non-critical state change.

Q: What’s poll-driven vs event-driven SCADA data acquisition?
A: Poll-driven — the SCADA server asks the PLC for a tag value on a regular cycle (e.g. every 1 second). Simple, predictable load on the network. Wastes bandwidth on tags that rarely change. Event-driven — the PLC pushes updates only when a value changes by more than a deadband threshold. More efficient, but requires the protocol to support it (OPC-UA subscriptions, MQTT publish). Most modern systems mix both — fast-changing tags on subscription, slow tags on polling.

Q: What’s deadband?
A: A small range around a value within which changes are ignored. If a pressure tag has a deadband of 0.1 PSI and the current value is 100 PSI, a reading of 100.05 PSI doesn’t trigger a “change” event — but 100.15 PSI does. Critical for reducing noise — sensor jitter at the millivolt level shouldn’t cause every poll cycle to be flagged as a change. SCADA systems typically have configurable deadbands per tag.

Q: What’s compression in a historian context?
A: The historian’s storage compression algorithm. Most industrial historians use swinging-door compression — they store a point only if it deviates from a linear interpolation between recent stored points by more than a configured threshold. So a flat pressure reading at 100 PSI for an hour might be stored as just two points (start, end) instead of 3,600 polls. Compression ratios of 10–100× are typical. Trade-off: you lose exact polling history; queries return interpolated values between stored points.

Q: What’s the difference between a SCADA system and a DCS?
A: DCS — Distributed Control System. Used in continuous-process plants (refineries, petrochemicals, power generation) where the control logic itself is distributed across multiple controllers and tightly integrated with the operator console. Examples: Honeywell Experion, Emerson DeltaV, Yokogawa CENTUM. SCADA — typically used for geographically distributed assets (pipelines, water utilities, oil fields) where the control is mostly local and SCADA is supervisory. The line is blurry — modern SCADA can do DCS-like control, and DCS can do SCADA-like remote monitoring. For this role, expect SCADA terminology to dominate.

Q: How do you typically integrate Python with a SCADA system?
A: Several common patterns. Read-only ingestion via OPC-UA — opcua-asyncio or freeopcua Python client subscribes to tags, writes to your time-series store. Northbound API consumption — many SCADAs expose a REST or gRPC API (CygNet has a Bridge API, Ignition has a Web Dev module). MQTT subscriber — if the SCADA publishes Sparkplug B over MQTT, your Python service subscribes to specific topics. Direct Modbus — for simpler or older systems, you can speak Modbus directly to the PLC bypassing SCADA (pymodbus is the canonical Python library). Database integration — the historian has its own query API (PI Web API, InfluxDB API, CygNet Bridge). Pick based on what the SCADA actually supports and the latency/reliability requirements.

Q: What’s a custody-transfer measurement?
A: A high-accuracy measurement at a financial transaction boundary — when product changes ownership or moves across a regulatory boundary. Examples: pipeline meter at the point one company hands oil to another, weighbridge for truck loading. Must meet regulatory accuracy requirements (typically ±0.25% or better), be calibrated regularly with documented traceability, and have audit-trail data integrity. For Python integration: custody-transfer data is the highest-stakes data in your pipeline. Lossless ingestion, full audit trail, no rounding, no silent transformations.

Q: Tell me about your hands-on SCADA experience.
A: “Twelve years at HPCL, four LPG plants — Kondapalli, Rajahmundry, Mangalore, Yediyur. Day-to-day SCADA touchpoints: automated tank gauging across custody-transfer LPG storage tanks, filling carousel control, pump-house monitoring, custody-transfer flow metering at the pipeline inlet, weighbridge integration for truck-out. The data flowed through a vendor SCADA into a historian, and I built and shipped Python applications on top — the carousel analytics platform with per-filling-head deviation analysis, the predictive maintenance system with Isolation Forest anomaly detection on bottom corrosion sensors, the OCR pipeline that fed verified tare weights back into SAP. I’ve been the person who tells maintenance the SCADA tag is reading bad and the person who writes the Python code that flagged it. I’ve also run a 72-hour flood crisis where ATG was offline and we manually backstopped custody-transfer measurement — that experience shapes how I think about reliability in industrial software.”
This is your big resume-walkthrough STAR. Practice it cold.

Q: What’s an ATG?
A: Automated Tank Gauging. A system that continuously measures tank level (and often temperature, density, water cut) using float-and-tape gauges, radar gauges, or hydrostatic pressure transmitters. Critical for inventory management, custody transfer, and overfill prevention. Common manufacturers: Veeder-Root, Honeywell Enraf, Emerson Rosemount Tank Gauging. ATG data is one of the most heavily-monitored streams in any liquid storage operation.

Q: What’s a SCADA tag’s “quality” attribute and how should Python code handle it?
A: Quality is a flag indicating whether the value is trustworthy. Common values: Good (read successfully from sensor), Bad (sensor failure, communication loss), Uncertain (substituted, manually entered, outside range, calibration overdue). Python code should never treat a Bad-quality value as Good — typical pattern is to filter Bad readings out of analytics, but log them so you can detect “sensor X has been Bad for 3 days.” For OPC-UA the StatusCode is more granular than just Good/Bad/Uncertain; for Modbus, quality is implicit (read succeeded or didn’t). Always preserve quality through your pipeline; never drop it.

Q: What’s a tag’s engineering unit and why does it matter for Python integration?
A: The unit the value is in — PSI, bar, °C, °F, kg, gal, m³, etc. SCADA usually stores values in engineering units already, but assume nothing. Two common bugs: a SCADA tag reads “raw counts” from an analog input (0–32767) and operators see scaled values via HMI scripting — your Python code reading raw will be wildly off. Or a tag is stored in metric but operators see imperial via HMI. Always verify the unit and document the unit through your pipeline (Pydantic field, DB column, API response).

Q: Explain the IIoT vs SCADA relationship.
A: IIoT — Industrial Internet of Things — typically refers to cloud-connected sensors and edge gateways pushing data over MQTT to cloud platforms (AWS IoT SiteWise, Azure IoT Hub, Google Cloud IoT). SCADA is the traditional on-prem control-and-monitor stack. They overlap heavily. Modern deployments often have SCADA on-prem for control + IIoT cloud for analytics, with an edge gateway bridging them. For oil & gas: CygNet on-prem, MQTT bridge to AWS IoT SiteWise, then advanced analytics in the cloud — that’s a real pattern.

Q: What’s a UDT in SCADA?
A: UDT — User-Defined Type. A reusable structure of tags. Example: a “PumpAsset” UDT might bundle RunStatus, RuntimeHours, MotorAmps, BearingVibration, OilTemp. Once defined, you instantiate it for each physical pump, getting consistent tag structure across hundreds of assets. For Python integration: if the SCADA exposes UDTs through OPC-UA, you can read the whole structure in one operation, and the structure shape is discoverable through browsing.

Q: What’s the Sparkplug B specification?
A: A specification on top of MQTT that adds standardized topic structure, payload format (Google Protobuf), and state management (birth/death certificates, last-will messages) for industrial use. Solves the MQTT problem of “every vendor invents their own payload” by giving everyone a contract. Used heavily in modern Ignition deployments and in HiveMQ-based architectures. For Python: tahu is the reference Python implementation; some IIoT platforms ship their own. Sparkplug is one of the more important “modern industrial” things to be conversant in.

Q: What’s the unified namespace concept?
A: A relatively new architectural idea (popularized by Walker Reynolds and HiveMQ): a single MQTT broker as the single source of truth for all plant data, organized in a hierarchical topic tree (enterprise/site/area/line/cell/asset/data). Every system publishes to and subscribes from this central broker. Decouples producers from consumers. For a Python developer: it changes the integration target — instead of integrating with N SCADA systems, you integrate with the UNS broker, and the SCADAs handle their side.

Q: What’s the Purdue model issue with cloud connectivity?
A: Strict Purdue would say cloud connectivity must traverse Level 3.5 DMZ, with no direct OT-to-cloud paths. In practice, modern IIoT often violates this — edge gateways push MQTT directly from Level 1/2 to cloud over secured channels. The compromise: a hardened MQTT bridge in the DMZ, or vendor-validated cellular/satellite paths (which avoid the corporate network entirely). Be ready to discuss this — security teams care, and getting it wrong has real consequences (Colonial Pipeline 2021 was an OT-related incident).

Q: What’s the difference between a digital tag and an analog tag?
A: Digital (or discrete) tag — boolean or enumerated state: pump On/Off, valve Open/Closed/Travelling, alarm Acked/Unacked. Analog tag — continuous value: pressure, temperature, flow rate. Storage and compression strategies differ — digital tags should compress to “transitions only,” analog tags get swinging-door or similar. Most SCADA systems support both; the tag definition declares the type.

Q: What does it mean when a SCADA tag goes “stale”?
A: The tag hasn’t been updated within a configured timeout. Causes: PLC offline, network partition, OPC server crashed, sensor failure. Important for Python pipelines — a stale tag should not be treated as a fresh reading. Typical pattern: track last_update_time per tag, alert if the gap exceeds the polling interval × 3, downgrade quality from Good to Stale.

Q: What’s a heartbeat tag and why use one?
A: A simple counter or boolean that the PLC toggles on every scan cycle. Lets the SCADA (and your Python ingestion) verify the PLC is alive even if no other tags are changing. If the heartbeat doesn’t increment for N seconds, all the tags from that PLC are suspect. Cheap, effective, and catches communication failures that simple “did I receive any update” checks miss.

Q: What’s the difference between cold standby, warm standby, and hot standby?
A: Cold standby — a backup system that’s powered off; operators manually start it on failure. Slow recovery. Warm standby — backup is powered and configured but not actively processing data; quicker switchover. Hot standby — both systems run synchronously; on failure the secondary takes over with minimal data loss. CygNet supports auto-failover and Automatic Service Recovery (ASR). For Python services, the equivalent is leader election (e.g. with Kubernetes Deployments + a leader-election library) or active-active with idempotent operations.

Q: What’s a “bad actor” in SCADA terminology?
A: An asset (or tag, or alarm) that consistently misbehaves and dominates operator attention. Bad-actor analysis identifies the worst-offending tags and addresses them at the root cause — recalibrating sensor, retuning alarm threshold, fixing process. For Python analytics on SCADA data, bad-actor analysis is a classic deliverable: rank tags by alarm count or quality-bad fraction, surface the top-N, route to maintenance.

Q: What’s an “operator action” log?
A: A timestamped log of every command an operator issued through the HMI — setpoint changes, valve commands, alarm acknowledgments. Critical for incident investigation and compliance. Most SCADAs maintain this in their internal database; modern setups also stream it to a SIEM or audit warehouse. For a Python service, you might consume this stream and join it with process data for “what was the operator doing 5 minutes before the trip?”

Q: What’s the role of a process historian in real-time decision-making?
A: Two roles: operations intelligence — operators viewing trends, comparing current behavior to historical norms, watching for drift. Engineering analysis — process engineers running studies, regression on historical data to identify operating envelope. The historian is read-mostly from the user’s side; writes come from the SCADA at scale. For analytics layers, the historian’s query API is your data source for batch jobs.

Q: Walk me through how you’d debug a SCADA tag that’s “showing wrong values” in Python.
A: The five-step diagnostic: (1) Verify in the HMI — does the operator’s screen agree with what your Python is seeing? If yes, the issue is upstream. (2) Check the historian directly — query the historian via its native tool. If the historian has the same wrong value, the SCADA-to-historian leg is fine. (3) Check the OPC-UA server (or whatever you’re using to read) — does the server expose the same value? If yes, your Python code is fine. (4) Check the PLC tag directly — using the vendor’s PLC programming software, read the address. If the PLC has the right value but OPC-UA shows the wrong one, the OPC server’s address mapping is off. (5) Check the sensor wiring — if the PLC has the wrong value, the input scaling or wiring is the issue. This is plant-floor work.

Q: What’s the difference between absolute and incremental setpoints?
A: Absolute setpoint — a target value (e.g. “set tank level setpoint to 80%”). Incremental setpoint — a relative adjustment (“increase setpoint by 5%”). Most modern SCADA uses absolute; legacy systems sometimes had incremental for control reasons. From a Python integration standpoint: writing setpoints is a control operation (the PLC will act on it), so it has higher security and audit requirements than reading.

Q: What’s an SOE log?
A: Sequence of Events log. A high-resolution (typically millisecond-level) log of digital tag transitions during an event — e.g. a process trip. Lets engineers reconstruct exactly which alarm fired first, which valve closed first, which trip cascaded into which. Different from an alarm log (which is operator-facing) — SOE is engineer-facing and used for post-mortem analysis. For a Python service supporting reliability engineering, SOE data is the gold standard.

Q: What’s the difference between a poll group and a subscription?
A: Poll group — a set of tags polled together at a configured rate (e.g. all pressure tags every 1 second). Implementation detail of poll-driven acquisition. Subscription — an OPC-UA construct where the client says “tell me when this tag changes by more than X” and the server pushes updates. More efficient. For Python OPC-UA clients, subscriptions are the modern default.

Q: What questions would you ask the team to understand their SCADA architecture?
A: What’s the SCADA platform — and what version?
What’s the historian, and is it the SCADA’s embedded one or external (PI, InfluxDB, TimescaleDB)?
What’s the integration protocol from SCADA to our Python service — OPC-UA, MQTT, REST, direct DB?
What’s the typical tag count and write rate?
What’s the latency budget — how fresh does the data need to be downstream?
What’s the on-call structure — if our Python pipeline drops data, who notices first?
What’s the change management process for deployments — can I push a Python change in a day, or is it a CAB-controlled process?
These are senior questions. Asking them in the interview is fine.

SECTION E — Industrial Protocols (OPC-UA, MQTT, Modbus)
30 Q&As — these will be asked. Have crisp answers.

Q: Walk me through OPC-UA at a high level.
A: OPC-UA — Open Platform Communications Unified Architecture, IEC 62541 — is the industry-standard protocol for secure, vendor-neutral communication between industrial systems. Key properties: request-response and publish-subscribe models, built-in security (X.509 certificates, encryption, authentication), rich information modeling (you can browse a server’s address space and discover types and methods), platform-independent (Windows, Linux, embedded), and standardized companion specs for specific industries (e.g. PackML, MTConnect). Replaces the older OPC Classic (DA, HDA, A&E) which was DCOM-based and Windows-only. For Python: opcua-asyncio (formerly python-opcua) is the dominant client.

Q: What’s the OPC-UA address space?
A: A hierarchical namespace of nodes — like a filesystem for industrial data. Root has folders, folders contain objects, objects have variables (the actual data tags), methods, and references to other nodes. Each node has a NodeId (ns=2;s=Pump1.RunStatus). You can browse the address space at runtime to discover what’s there. For Python integration: browsing once at startup, caching the NodeId-to-tag mapping, and then subscribing or reading is the typical pattern.

Q: What’s an OPC-UA subscription and why use it?
A: A subscription is a server-side construct where the client registers interest in specific nodes and the server pushes updates whenever they change (subject to a sampling interval and queue size). Way more efficient than polling — for a SCADA with 50,000 tags where 100 change per second, polling at 1 Hz means 50,000 reads/sec while subscriptions deliver only the 100 changes. In Python:
from asyncua import Client, ua

async with Client(url="opc.tcp://server:4840") as client:
    sub = await client.create_subscription(period=500, handler=MyHandler())
    node = client.get_node("ns=2;s=PT_101.PV")
    handle = await sub.subscribe_data_change(node)

Q: What’s the security model in OPC-UA?
A: Three layers. Transport security — TLS-equivalent: encryption (None / Basic128Rsa15 / Basic256 / Basic256Sha256 / Aes256Sha256RsaPss). Application authentication — X.509 certificates, mutual auth between client and server. User authentication — within an authenticated app session, identify the user (anonymous, username/password, X.509). Important: OPC-UA’s “None” security mode exists and you’ll see it in dev — it sends data in cleartext. Never let it into production. Deployments commonly use Basic256Sha256 or Aes256Sha256RsaPss with mutual cert auth.

Q: What’s Modbus?
A: The oldest and simplest industrial protocol — designed by Modicon (now Schneider) in 1979. Two flavors: Modbus RTU (serial, RS-485, with a CRC checksum), Modbus TCP (over TCP/IP, with a Modbus Application Protocol header instead of CRC). Master-slave model: one master, many slaves. The master polls slaves for register values. No security in the spec — it’s plaintext on the wire. Still widely used because it’s dead simple, free to implement, and most field devices speak it. For Python: pymodbus is the canonical library.

Q: What’s the Modbus data model?
A: Four data types, by address space: Coils (1-bit, read-write — booleans for outputs), Discrete Inputs (1-bit, read-only — booleans for inputs), Input Registers (16-bit, read-only — sensor readings), Holding Registers (16-bit, read-write — setpoints and configurable values). Addresses are typically 0-indexed in the protocol but 1-indexed in vendor documentation — a common bug source. Larger types (32-bit floats, 64-bit) are encoded across multiple registers, and byte order varies by vendor — big-endian, little-endian, or the dreaded mid-endian “word swap.” Always test against the device.

Q: Show me a Python Modbus TCP client reading a holding register.
A: from pymodbus.client import ModbusTcpClient

with ModbusTcpClient("192.168.1.10", port=502) as client:
    response = client.read_holding_registers(address=100, count=2, slave=1)
    if response.isError():
        raise RuntimeError(f"Modbus error: {response}")
    # 32-bit float across two 16-bit registers, big-endian word/byte
    from pymodbus.payload import BinaryPayloadDecoder
    from pymodbus.constants import Endian
    decoder = BinaryPayloadDecoder.fromRegisters(
        response.registers,
        byteorder=Endian.BIG,
        wordorder=Endian.BIG,
    )
    value = decoder.decode_32bit_float()
    print(f"Pressure: {value} PSI")

Q: What’s MQTT?
A: Message Queuing Telemetry Transport. A lightweight publish-subscribe protocol over TCP, designed for constrained devices and unreliable networks. Three actors: publisher (sends a message to a topic), broker (routes messages), subscriber (receives messages from topics). Three QoS levels: 0 — at most once (fire and forget), 1 — at least once (publisher waits for ack, may resend, may duplicate), 2 — exactly once (four-way handshake, slowest but reliable). Lightweight payload (binary or text), small headers. Originally designed for satellite/SCADA links for oil & gas — fitting for this role.

Q: What’s an MQTT topic structure?
A: Hierarchical, slash-separated, no enforced schema (which is the problem Sparkplug B solves). Conventional structure: enterprise/site/area/asset/tag — e.g. acme/houston/refinery1/pump3/runstatus. Wildcards: + matches one level (acme/+/refinery1/pump3/runstatus), # matches multi-level at the end (acme/houston/#). For Python with paho-mqtt or aiomqtt, you subscribe to the topic pattern, register a callback, and the broker routes matching messages to you.

Q: Show me a Python MQTT subscriber.
A: import asyncio
import aiomqtt

async def consume_tags():
    async with aiomqtt.Client(hostname="broker.local", port=1883) as client:
        await client.subscribe("plant1/+/+/value")
        async for message in client.messages:
            topic = str(message.topic)
            payload = message.payload.decode()
            print(f"{topic} -> {payload}")

asyncio.run(consume_tags())

Q: What are MQTT retained messages and last-will?
A: Retained — when a publisher sets retain=True, the broker keeps the most recent message on that topic and delivers it to any new subscriber immediately. Used for current-state messages — a subscriber connecting late doesn’t have to wait for the next publish to know the current value. Last-will (LWT) — a message the client tells the broker to publish on its behalf if the client disconnects ungracefully. Used for “device offline” notifications, plumbing for Sparkplug birth/death certificates.

Q: Compare OPC-UA vs MQTT.
A: Aspect
OPC-UA
MQTT
Model
Client-server (req-resp + sub)
Publish-subscribe
Standardization
Heavy — info models, types, methods
Light — payload is your problem
Security
Built-in (X.509, encryption)
TLS at transport, app-level above
Discoverability
Browse address space
Topic subscriptions, no inherent schema
Use case
OT integration, SCADA, plant networks
IoT, edge-to-cloud, constrained devices
Implementation effort
Weeks (complex SDK)
Days (simple libs)
Bandwidth efficiency
Moderate
High (small overhead)
They’re complementary, not competing. Modern stacks use OPC-UA inside the plant and MQTT for cloud egress.

Q: What’s OPC-UA over MQTT (Pub/Sub)?
A: A relatively newer OPC-UA spec that lets OPC-UA run on top of MQTT brokers — you get OPC-UA’s standardized info model with MQTT’s transport efficiency. Useful for high-scale IIoT where the rich client-server model doesn’t fit. UADP (UA Datagram Protocol) is the binary encoding. Adoption is still growing; if it comes up, know it exists.

Q: What’s DNP3 and when is it used?
A: Distributed Network Protocol version 3. Used heavily in electric utilities (substations) and water/wastewater. Supports time-stamped events (millisecond resolution at the RTU), unsolicited responses (event-driven), and quality flags. More feature-rich than Modbus but more complex. Less common in oil & gas than Modbus or OPC-UA, but widely used in midstream pipeline operations for legacy reasons.

Q: What’s BACnet?
A: Building Automation and Control Network. Used in HVAC, lighting, security — building systems, not industrial process. You won’t see it much in oil & gas plants but you might see it for the office building’s HVAC. BAC0 is the Python library. Mention it if asked, but don’t get distracted.

Q: What’s PROFIBUS / PROFINET / EtherNet/IP?
A: Real-time fieldbus protocols. PROFIBUS is the older serial fieldbus standard from Siemens. PROFINET is the Ethernet successor — runs over standard Ethernet hardware. EtherNet/IP (CIP over Ethernet) is the Allen-Bradley/Rockwell counterpart. These are mostly device-to-PLC and PLC-to-PLC; you won’t typically write Python directly to them. Knowledge level for this interview: know the names, know they exist, know which vendor uses which.

Q: What’s a typical industrial Python ingestion pipeline architecture?
A: Edge gateway (Python service on a hardened box near the SCADA, often in the DMZ) reads from OPC-UA / MQTT / Modbus, buffers locally to handle network drops, applies basic transforms (deadband filtering, unit normalization), and forwards to an enterprise-side service. Enterprise service (FastAPI or async ingestion worker) accepts data via Kafka or HTTP, validates with Pydantic, writes to time-series DB, exposes query API. Application layer consumes from query API or directly from streaming layer.

Q: How do you handle network unreliability in industrial Python services?
A: Three patterns. Local buffering — write to local file or embedded DB before forwarding upstream; durable across crashes. At-least-once delivery with idempotent writes — your time-series store accepts the same point twice without harm. Backpressure handling — if upstream is slow or down, your buffer must have a bounded size and a clear discard policy (drop oldest, drop newest, alert and stop). Don’t pretend the network is reliable — industrial sites have brownouts, switch reboots, cellular drop-outs.

Q: What’s the difference between a hard real-time and soft real-time system?
A: Hard real-time — missing a deadline causes catastrophic failure. PLC scan cycles, safety instrumented systems. Custom OS or RTOS, deterministic scheduling. Soft real-time — missing a deadline degrades quality but doesn’t kill anything. SCADA data acquisition, video streaming, IIoT pipelines. Standard OS, best-effort scheduling. Python is decisively in soft real-time territory — you can’t guarantee a 10 ms scan cycle from Python on Linux. For an industrial Python role, your value is in soft real-time: reliable data movement, eventual consistency, fast-enough.

Q: What’s protocol gateway and when do you use it?
A: A device or service that translates between protocols. Modbus-to-OPC-UA gateway, OPC-UA-to-MQTT gateway, custom protocol-to-MQTT bridge. Lets you bring legacy field devices into a modern stack without ripping them out. Examples: Kepware (PTC), MatrikonOPC, FlowFuse, custom gateways built in Python or Node-RED. For Python: writing a gateway is a common task — you read from one protocol library and publish to another. Be ready to architect this.

Q: What’s a “tag explosion” problem and how do you handle it?
A: When a SCADA system has so many tags (millions) that operations like “browse all tags” become impractical, and downstream stores struggle with cardinality. Symptoms: slow startup, slow historian queries, expensive cloud bills. Mitigations: flatten the tag hierarchy (don’t subscribe to every node — pick what you actually need), implement tag whitelisting, use deadband filtering aggressively, downsample at the edge. InfluxDB v1/v2 had a famous high-cardinality problem; v3 (Rust/Arrow) is much better. TimescaleDB handles cardinality well.

Q: How do you handle clock synchronization in industrial systems?
A: Critical because timestamps are your join key. NTP (Network Time Protocol) — sub-second accuracy, sufficient for most SCADA. PTP (Precision Time Protocol, IEEE 1588) — sub-microsecond, used in synchronized control systems. GPS time — common for substations and pipelines. For Python services: trust the timestamps the SCADA sends, but validate — reject points more than X minutes off the wall clock as a sanity check. Always store in UTC; render in local time only at the UI.

Q: What’s a “sub-second” data problem?
A: Many industrial systems generate data faster than 1 Hz — vibration sensors at 10 kHz, electrical analyzers at 50/60 Hz cycles. Storing every sample is impractical for long-term retention. Pattern: stream the high-rate data through an analytics layer (FFT for vibration, RMS for electrical) at the edge, store the analytics results long-term, retain raw samples briefly for incident investigation. Don’t try to push 10 kHz tag data into a general-purpose time-series DB without thinking about cost.

Q: What’s “drift” in industrial sensors and how should Python code handle it?
A: Sensor drift — the gradual deviation of a sensor’s reading from the true value over time. Pressure transmitters drift due to membrane fatigue; thermocouples drift due to oxidation. Mitigation in code: look for slow trends in the residual between expected and observed values; flag for calibration when drift exceeds tolerance. Don’t try to “correct” drift in your code — that’s a calibration management discipline, not a software bug. Surface the signal; let maintenance fix the sensor.

Q: What’s a “frozen” tag and how do you detect it?
A: A tag whose value hasn’t changed for an unusually long time — could mean stable process or could mean a stuck sensor or comms failure. Detection: track time-since-last-change per tag; if it exceeds a threshold (e.g. 10× the typical change interval), flag. False positives are common (tank level legitimately stable when no flow), so this needs context — frozen + alarm-condition is more interesting than frozen alone.

Q: Walk me through your experience with MQTT in production.
A: “At HPCL we used MQTT in the IoT-based bottom corrosion detection system — sensors at the base of LPG tanks publishing to a local MQTT broker, an aggregator subscribing and feeding an Isolation Forest anomaly detector running in Python. It was a relatively small Sparkplug-style deployment, but the lessons were the standard ones: birth/death messages for device state, retained messages for current-value subscribers joining late, QoS 1 for the data path because we couldn’t afford to lose detection events. The brokers ran in HA pairs with NATS-style failover. The pipeline fed into our predictive maintenance system across 55 plants.”

Q: What is the difference between QoS 1 and QoS 2?
A: QoS 1 (at-least-once) — publisher sends, broker acks. If the publisher doesn’t get the ack, it republishes — so subscribers may receive duplicates. QoS 2 (exactly-once) — four-way handshake (PUBLISH → PUBREC → PUBREL → PUBCOMP). Slowest but no duplicates. Practical advice: use QoS 1 unless duplicate handling on the consumer is genuinely impossible. Most analytics workloads handle duplicates fine if the time-series store is keyed on (tag, timestamp) — second write is a no-op. QoS 2 is rare in practice because it costs throughput.

Q: What’s the difference between Modbus function codes 03 and 04?
A: Function code 03 — Read Holding Registers (16-bit, read-write). Function code 04 — Read Input Registers (16-bit, read-only). Different address spaces. Sensor values typically live in Input Registers; configurable parameters typically in Holding Registers. Vendor docs often address them differently — Holding Registers as 4xxxx, Input Registers as 3xxxx. Verify before integrating; this is a common bug.

Q: What’s a “Modbus wrapper” pattern in Python services?
A: A wrapper class that hides the address scaling, byte order, and multi-register decoding behind a clean API:
class PressureSensor:
    def __init__(self, client: ModbusTcpClient, slave_id: int, address: int):
        self.client = client; self.slave_id = slave_id; self.address = address

    def read(self) -> float:
        rr = self.client.read_input_registers(
            self.address, count=2, slave=self.slave_id
        )
        if rr.isError():
            raise IOError(f"Read failed: {rr}")
        from pymodbus.payload import BinaryPayloadDecoder
        from pymodbus.constants import Endian
        decoder = BinaryPayloadDecoder.fromRegisters(
            rr.registers, byteorder=Endian.BIG, wordorder=Endian.BIG
        )
        return decoder.decode_32bit_float()

ps = PressureSensor(client, slave_id=1, address=100)
print(ps.read())
The encapsulation lets the rest of your code think in physical terms, not register addresses.

Q: How would you architect a Python service that ingests OPC-UA data from a SCADA into a time-series database, at high reliability?
A: opcua-asyncio client subscribes to a configured set of nodes (loaded from config, not hardcoded).
In-process queue (asyncio.Queue, bounded) holds incoming DataValue events.
Writer coroutine drains the queue, batches by ~5,000 points or 1 second whichever first, writes to TimescaleDB (asyncpg.copy_records_to_table for performance) or InfluxDB (line protocol over HTTP).
Local on-disk buffer (SQLite or RocksDB) for durability when the time-series DB is unavailable; on reconnect, drain the buffer first.
Reconnection logic with exponential backoff for the OPC-UA client (servers do go down).
Heartbeat metric exposed on a /metrics endpoint (Prometheus format) — last_message_time, queue_depth, write_lag, error_count.
Graceful shutdown — on SIGTERM, stop accepting new events but flush the queue and the disk buffer before exiting.
Containerized with a single config file, deployed on Kubernetes with a PVC for the buffer and resource limits matched to expected throughput.
This is the answer they want for “design an industrial ingestion pipeline.” Have it memorized.

SECTION F — Time-Series Databases (InfluxDB, TimescaleDB, Prometheus, OpenTSDB)
30 Q&As — heavy assessment focus expected

Q: What makes time-series data different from normal relational data?
A: Three properties: append-only writes, almost always in strict timestamp order. Time-range + aggregation queries dominate (rarely “find this single row,” almost always “average per minute over last hour”). Old data accessed less, at coarser granularity. A general-purpose B-tree-indexed table handles all three poorly at billions of rows. Time-series databases optimize for these patterns — time-based partitioning, columnar/compressed storage, native downsampling.

Q: What’s TimescaleDB and how does it work?
A: A PostgreSQL extension that adds time-series optimizations. Core abstraction: hypertable — a virtual table that’s automatically partitioned into chunks by time (and optionally by space/dimension). You query a hypertable like a regular Postgres table, and TimescaleDB transparently routes queries to the right chunks. Compression on older chunks (~10× typical), continuous aggregates (incrementally-maintained materialized views), retention policies for auto-drop. Sweet spot: when you want time-series performance but also the full Postgres ecosystem (joins, ORM support, complex SQL).

Q: What’s a hypertable?
A: A logical table partitioned across many physical chunks by time range. Default chunk interval is 7 days. When you insert a row, TimescaleDB routes it to the correct chunk based on the time column. Queries that include a time range filter automatically prune unnecessary chunks. For sizing: chunk interval should be such that recent data fits in memory — too small means too many chunks (planner overhead), too large means working set spills to disk.

Q: How do you create a hypertable?
A: CREATE TABLE sensor_readings (
    ts        TIMESTAMPTZ      NOT NULL,
    tag_id    TEXT             NOT NULL,
    value     DOUBLE PRECISION NOT NULL,
    quality   SMALLINT         NOT NULL DEFAULT 0
);

SELECT create_hypertable(&#39;sensor_readings&#39;, &#39;ts&#39;, chunk_time_interval => INTERVAL &#39;1 day&#39;);

CREATE INDEX ON sensor_readings (tag_id, ts DESC);
Critical: index on (tag_id, ts DESC) is the workhorse for “give me the last N readings for tag X” queries.

Q: What’s a continuous aggregate in TimescaleDB?
A: A materialized view that’s incrementally refreshed — so when new raw data arrives, the aggregate updates without re-reading the whole hypertable. Used for downsampling: store raw 1-second data with short retention, build a 1-minute aggregate with longer retention, build an hourly aggregate with year-long retention. Querying recent data hits the raw, querying older data hits the aggregate — transparently.
CREATE MATERIALIZED VIEW sensor_minutely
WITH (timescaledb.continuous) AS
SELECT
    time_bucket(&#39;1 minute&#39;, ts) AS bucket,
    tag_id,
    AVG(value) AS avg_value,
    MIN(value) AS min_value,
    MAX(value) AS max_value,
    COUNT(*) AS n
FROM sensor_readings
GROUP BY bucket, tag_id;

SELECT add_continuous_aggregate_policy(&#39;sensor_minutely&#39;,
    start_offset => INTERVAL &#39;2 hours&#39;,
    end_offset => INTERVAL &#39;1 minute&#39;,
    schedule_interval => INTERVAL &#39;1 minute&#39;);

Q: What’s compression in TimescaleDB?
A: Column-store-style compression on older chunks — typically 90%+ size reduction. You declare a compression policy (“compress chunks older than 7 days”) and TimescaleDB rewrites them as compressed. Compressed chunks are read-only by default but support specific operations (predicates pushed down, aggregation). Trade-off: writes to compressed chunks are slow (must decompress and re-compress), so configure your compression cutoff well past the active write window.

Q: What’s InfluxDB and how does it differ from TimescaleDB?
A: Purpose-built time-series database, written in Go (v1/v2) and Rust (v3). Tag-and-field data model rather than relational. InfluxDB v1/v2: Flux query language (functional, streaming), TSM storage engine, suffered from cardinality problems (high-cardinality tags caused huge index growth and slow queries). InfluxDB v3 Core (GA April 2025): complete rewrite on Apache Arrow + Parquet, SQL queries (replacing Flux), much better cardinality handling. Trade-offs vs TimescaleDB: InfluxDB is purpose-built and often faster on pure time-series workloads; TimescaleDB gives you Postgres ergonomics, joins, and a richer ecosystem.

Q: What’s the InfluxDB line protocol?
A: The wire format for writing data to InfluxDB:
measurement,tag1=value1,tag2=value2 field1=1.0,field2="text" 1672531200000000000
Format: measurement[,tag_set] field_set [timestamp]. Timestamp in nanoseconds since epoch by default. Tags are indexed (use for things you’ll filter on — sensor_id, plant, region); fields are not (use for the actual values — temperature, pressure). Confusing tags and fields is the most common InfluxDB mistake — tags must be low-cardinality.

Q: What’s the InfluxDB cardinality problem?
A: InfluxDB indexes every unique combination of measurement + tag values. If you accidentally put a high-cardinality value in a tag — like a UUID or a timestamp — the index grows unboundedly and query performance collapses. Rule of thumb: tag values should be low-cardinality and queryable; high-cardinality identifiers (user IDs, device serials) should go in fields if they’re not query keys, or be hashed/binned. v3 Core mostly solved this with Arrow/Parquet, but the rule still applies.

Q: What’s a retention policy?
A: A rule that auto-deletes data older than N. InfluxDB v1/v2: CREATE RETENTION POLICY "30d" ON "mydb" DURATION 30d REPLICATION 1. InfluxDB v3 Core: 72-hour retention is the hard cap on the free tier (which is harsh, push to v3 Enterprise or another DB if you need more). TimescaleDB: SELECT add_retention_policy(&#39;sensor_readings&#39;, INTERVAL &#39;90 days&#39;). Always pair retention with downsampling — drop raw data after 30 days but keep minutely aggregates for a year.

Q: What’s downsampling and why is it essential?
A: Reducing data resolution as it ages. Raw 1-second points for the last 24 hours. 1-minute averages for the last 30 days. 1-hour averages for the last year. Daily for older. Why: storage cost and query performance. A query asking for “average pressure for 2024” doesn’t need to read billions of raw points — it reads 8,760 hourly aggregates. Implementation: continuous aggregates (TimescaleDB), continuous queries / tasks (InfluxDB), or scheduled jobs (Airflow + SQL).

Q: What’s Prometheus and how does it differ from InfluxDB/TimescaleDB?
A: A metrics-and-monitoring system, not a general-purpose time-series DB. Pull model — Prometheus scrapes targets at a configured interval (most TSDBs are push). Built for metrics, not events — no string fields, just numeric metrics with labels. Short retention by default (15 days); for long-term you pair with Thanos or Cortex. Use case: infrastructure monitoring, application metrics, alerting via Alertmanager. Don’t use Prometheus as your industrial historian; it’s not designed for that.

Q: What’s OpenTSDB?
A: A distributed time-series DB on top of HBase/Cassandra. Older than InfluxDB and TimescaleDB; declining usage. Mention it if asked, know it’s HBase-backed, and move on. The JD listed it as one of the time-series DBs the team has worked with — could mean legacy infrastructure.

Q: How do you choose between TimescaleDB and InfluxDB for a new project?
A: Pick TimescaleDB when: you need joins with relational data (asset metadata, customer records), you have an existing Postgres stack and team, you need standard SQL, your queries are complex, your team isn’t dedicated to a niche DB. Pick InfluxDB when: you need maximum write/read throughput on pure time-series workloads, your queries are simple (filter by tag + time + aggregate), you don’t need joins, you’re comfortable with Flux or v3’s SQL. For an industrial Python role at a Houston energy client: TimescaleDB is increasingly popular because of the Postgres ergonomics and the fact that O&G data benefits from joining with asset hierarchies. But many shops already have InfluxDB — be ready for either.

Q: Show me an InfluxDB Flux query to compute a 5-minute moving average.
A: from(bucket: "sensors")
  |> range(start: -1h)
  |> filter(fn: (r) => r._measurement == "pressure" and r.tag_id == "PT_101")
  |> aggregateWindow(every: 1m, fn: mean, createEmpty: false)
  |> movingAverage(n: 5)
  |> yield(name: "ma5")

Q: Show me a TimescaleDB SQL query for the same 5-minute moving average.
A: SELECT
    time_bucket(&#39;1 minute&#39;, ts) AS minute,
    AVG(value) OVER (
        ORDER BY time_bucket(&#39;1 minute&#39;, ts)
        ROWS BETWEEN 4 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW
    ) AS ma5
FROM sensor_readings
WHERE tag_id = &#39;PT_101&#39;
  AND ts >= NOW() - INTERVAL &#39;1 hour&#39;
GROUP BY minute
ORDER BY minute;
Standard SQL window function — works on any Postgres-compatible store.

Q: What’s the deal with InfluxDB v3’s 72-hour retention limit?
A: InfluxDB 3 Core (the free, open-source tier) ships with a hard 72-hour retention cap and a 5-database limit. To go beyond, you need v3 Enterprise (commercial license). Many users were unhappy with the change from v2’s more permissive limits. Practical implication: if a Houston client is running InfluxDB 3 Core and wants long-term data, they’re either on Enterprise, or they’re shipping aggregated data out to a Parquet lake on S3, or they’re on TimescaleDB instead.

Q: What’s an upsert in a time-series context?
A: INSERT-or-UPDATE on conflict. Time-series stores typically have (timestamp, series_key) as the natural key. Two writes with the same key should merge (typically: take the latest). TimescaleDB:
INSERT INTO sensor_readings (ts, tag_id, value, quality)
VALUES ($1, $2, $3, $4)
ON CONFLICT (ts, tag_id) DO UPDATE
  SET value = EXCLUDED.value, quality = EXCLUDED.quality;
InfluxDB merges by default (last write wins on identical timestamp+tags). For Modbus or OPC-UA replays, idempotency is critical.

Q: What’s the right partitioning strategy for industrial time-series data?
A: For TimescaleDB: time-based chunking (1 day or 1 week chunks for high-volume, 1 month for low). Add a space dimension (add_dimension) only if you have many distinct devices and queries naturally filter by device — say, a multi-site deployment where you almost always query “this site only.” For InfluxDB v3: shards are time-based; cardinality (tag values) determines internal organization. General rule: the partition key should match the dominant query filter.

Q: How do you handle late-arriving data in a time-series store?
A: Common in industrial systems — edge gateway buffers data during a network outage, then floods upstream when reconnected. TimescaleDB: chunks and continuous aggregates handle late data — late writes go to the right chunk, continuous aggregates re-process when they detect changes (use ignore_invalidation_older_than to bound the re-processing). InfluxDB: writes to old timestamps work fine but can be slower as old shards may be compacted. Don’t rely on “data arrives in order” — design for it to arrive out of order.

Q: What’s the difference between materialized view and continuous aggregate?
A: A regular Postgres materialized view is fully recomputed on REFRESH. A TimescaleDB continuous aggregate is incrementally refreshed — only the new chunks are processed. Massive performance win for time-series. Continuous aggregates can themselves be sources for further aggregates (cascading downsampling).

Q: How would you store SCADA tag data with metadata in TimescaleDB?
A: Two-table design.
CREATE TABLE tags (
    tag_id TEXT PRIMARY KEY,
    asset_id TEXT NOT NULL,
    description TEXT,
    unit TEXT,
    deadband DOUBLE PRECISION,
    high_alarm DOUBLE PRECISION,
    low_alarm DOUBLE PRECISION
);

CREATE TABLE readings (
    ts TIMESTAMPTZ NOT NULL,
    tag_id TEXT NOT NULL REFERENCES tags(tag_id),
    value DOUBLE PRECISION NOT NULL,
    quality SMALLINT NOT NULL
);
SELECT create_hypertable(&#39;readings&#39;, &#39;ts&#39;, chunk_time_interval => INTERVAL &#39;1 day&#39;);
CREATE INDEX ON readings (tag_id, ts DESC);
Querying with metadata is a normal SQL JOIN — that’s the TimescaleDB advantage.

Q: How do you handle batch writes from Python?
A: TimescaleDB with asyncpg: use copy_records_to_table for large batches:
async with pool.acquire() as conn:
    await conn.copy_records_to_table(
        &#39;readings&#39;,
        records=[(ts, tag_id, value, quality) for ...],
        columns=[&#39;ts&#39;, &#39;tag_id&#39;, &#39;value&#39;, &#39;quality&#39;],
    )
10–50× faster than executing individual INSERTs. InfluxDB: the line protocol is naturally batch-friendly; concatenate up to ~5,000 lines per HTTP write. Always batch.

Q: What’s a “gap fill” query?
A: A query that returns continuous time buckets even when no data was recorded in some buckets. TimescaleDB:
SELECT time_bucket_gapfill(&#39;1 minute&#39;, ts) AS bucket,
       LOCF(AVG(value)) AS value     -- LOCF = Last Observation Carried Forward
FROM readings
WHERE tag_id = &#39;PT_101&#39;
  AND ts BETWEEN &#39;2026-05-08 00:00&#39; AND &#39;2026-05-08 01:00&#39;
GROUP BY bucket
ORDER BY bucket;
LOCF() carries the last value forward; interpolate() does linear interpolation. Critical for charts — you don’t want the line to disappear in a data gap.

Q: What’s the cost trade-off between high-precision raw data and downsampled data?
A: Raw 1-second data for 1,000 tags for 1 year = ~30 billion rows. At ~30 bytes/row compressed, that’s ~900 GB. Storage isn’t cheap; queries over the full range are slow. Downsampled to 1-minute averages: 16 GB. To 1-hour: 250 MB. The pattern: keep raw data short (7–30 days for incident investigation), keep downsampled long (years for trending). Communicate this clearly to ops — they’ll ask “why can’t I see 1-second data from 6 months ago?”

Q: What’s the role of cold storage in industrial time-series?
A: After data ages out of the hot store (TimescaleDB / InfluxDB), it lands in cheaper, queryable-but-slow storage — Parquet files on S3, Apache Iceberg tables, columnar archives. Queryable via DuckDB, Spark, AWS Athena. For oil & gas: regulators sometimes require 7+ year retention of custody-transfer data. You’re not keeping that in TimescaleDB. Cold storage is the answer.

Q: How would you architect a hot-warm-cold tier for industrial time-series?
A: Hot (last 7 days): TimescaleDB hypertable, no compression, sub-second query latency. Warm (8–365 days): TimescaleDB compressed chunks, continuous aggregates for common queries. Cold (>365 days): Parquet files on S3, partitioned by date and tag prefix, queried via Athena or DuckDB. Migration jobs run nightly. The application queries through a routing layer that picks the right tier based on the requested time range.

Q: What’s “cardinality” in time-series and why does it matter?
A: The number of unique series. In InfluxDB-speak, a series is a unique combination of measurement + tag values. 1,000 sensors × 5 tag combinations = 5,000 series — fine. 1,000 sensors × {device_id, user_id (1M users), session_id} = effectively unbounded — terrible. High cardinality blows up the index and crushes query performance. Mitigation: keep tags low-cardinality, push high-cardinality identifiers to fields (or to a relational side-table you join later).

Q: What’s swinging-door compression and where do you see it?
A: A lossy compression algorithm that stores points only when the value deviates from an interpolated line by more than a threshold. Standard in industrial historians (PI, CygNet’s embedded historian). Trade-off: massive compression ratios (100×+) for a small loss of precision. Most general-purpose TSDBs don’t do swinging-door — they do columnar compression instead. If you’re consuming from a SCADA historian and forwarding to TimescaleDB, you’ve already lost the original raw data — accept it and move on.

Q: How do you deal with 100+ Hz data in a time-series DB?
A: Three approaches, layered. (1) Don’t store the raw stream long-term — compute aggregates at the edge (1-second RMS, peak detection) and store those. (2) For incident investigation, retain raw briefly (24 hours) in a fast TSDB or Kafka topic. (3) For retroactive analysis, push raw to S3 / Parquet, queryable via Athena. Real example: vibration sensors on rotating equipment at 10 kHz — compute FFT bins at the edge every 1 second, store FFT results long-term, retain raw waveforms for 24 hours for fault diagnosis.

SECTION G — SQL & Window Functions
25 Q&As — assessment specifically calls this out for MoM trend analysis

Q: What’s a window function?
A: A function that performs a calculation across a set of rows related to the current row, without collapsing the rows. Unlike GROUP BY which reduces N rows to 1 per group, window functions keep all N rows and add the computed value to each. Syntax: function() OVER (PARTITION BY ... ORDER BY ... [frame]). Three flavors: ranking (ROW_NUMBER, RANK, DENSE_RANK, NTILE), value access (LAG, LEAD, FIRST_VALUE, LAST_VALUE), aggregate-as-window (SUM, AVG, COUNT over a window).

Q: What’s PARTITION BY vs ORDER BY in a window function?
A: PARTITION BY divides rows into independent groups; the window function resets within each group. ORDER BY orders rows within the partition — required for LAG, LEAD, running totals, anything where sequence matters. You can have either, both, or neither (an empty OVER () treats the entire result as one partition).

Q: What’s the difference between ROW_NUMBER, RANK, and DENSE_RANK?
A: For salaries 100, 90, 90, 80: - ROW_NUMBER(): 1, 2, 3, 4 (unique sequential) - RANK(): 1, 2, 2, 4 (ties share, gap after) - DENSE_RANK(): 1, 2, 2, 3 (ties share, no gap)
Rule of thumb: ROW_NUMBER for “pick exactly one per group” deduplication; RANK for tournament-style ranking; DENSE_RANK for “what tier is this in” without gaps.

Q: Show me the canonical month-over-month percent-change query.
A: WITH monthly AS (
    SELECT
        DATE_TRUNC(&#39;month&#39;, sale_date) AS month,
        SUM(amount) AS revenue
    FROM sales
    GROUP BY DATE_TRUNC(&#39;month&#39;, sale_date)
)
SELECT
    month,
    revenue,
    LAG(revenue, 1) OVER (ORDER BY month) AS prev_month_revenue,
    revenue - LAG(revenue, 1) OVER (ORDER BY month) AS abs_change,
    ROUND(
        (revenue - LAG(revenue, 1) OVER (ORDER BY month))::NUMERIC
        / NULLIF(LAG(revenue, 1) OVER (ORDER BY month), 0)
        * 100,
        2
    ) AS pct_change
FROM monthly
ORDER BY month;
The NULLIF guards against divide-by-zero when the previous month is zero. The first row’s pct_change will be NULL because there’s no prior month — fine, mention this proactively.

Q: Same query but partitioned by region.
A: WITH monthly AS (
    SELECT
        region,
        DATE_TRUNC(&#39;month&#39;, sale_date) AS month,
        SUM(amount) AS revenue
    FROM sales
    GROUP BY region, DATE_TRUNC(&#39;month&#39;, sale_date)
)
SELECT
    region,
    month,
    revenue,
    LAG(revenue, 1) OVER (PARTITION BY region ORDER BY month) AS prev_month_revenue,
    ROUND(
        (revenue - LAG(revenue, 1) OVER (PARTITION BY region ORDER BY month))::NUMERIC
        / NULLIF(LAG(revenue, 1) OVER (PARTITION BY region ORDER BY month), 0)
        * 100,
        2
    ) AS pct_change
FROM monthly
ORDER BY region, month;
PARTITION BY region ensures the LAG resets at each region boundary.

Q: Show me a 7-day rolling average.
A: SELECT
    day,
    daily_active_users,
    AVG(daily_active_users) OVER (
        ORDER BY day
        ROWS BETWEEN 6 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW
    ) AS rolling_avg_7d
FROM daily_metrics
ORDER BY day;
ROWS BETWEEN 6 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW — exactly 7 rows including the current. The first 6 rows have a “warm-up” period where the average is over fewer rows; mention this in interviews.

Q: What’s the difference between ROWS and RANGE in a frame clause?
A: ROWS counts physical rows. RANGE counts rows with values within a range. For evenly-spaced data they’re equivalent. For data with gaps (missing days), ROWS BETWEEN 6 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW gives you the previous 6 actual rows (could span 14 days if data is sparse), while RANGE BETWEEN INTERVAL &#39;6 days&#39; PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW gives you the previous 6 calendar days regardless of gaps. For time-series with potential gaps, RANGE is usually the right answer.

Q: Show me a query that picks the most recent reading per tag.
A: WITH ranked AS (
    SELECT
        tag_id,
        ts,
        value,
        ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY tag_id ORDER BY ts DESC) AS rn
    FROM readings
)
SELECT tag_id, ts, value
FROM ranked
WHERE rn = 1;
The classic “top-N per group” pattern. With rn = 1 it’s “latest per tag.”

Q: What’s the alternative to ROW_NUMBER for “most recent per group”?
A: DISTINCT ON in Postgres:
SELECT DISTINCT ON (tag_id) tag_id, ts, value
FROM readings
ORDER BY tag_id, ts DESC;
Or for non-Postgres: a self-join or correlated subquery. DISTINCT ON is often faster than ROW_NUMBER on Postgres because the planner can avoid materializing the full ranking. TimescaleDB has last(value, ts) aggregate that’s even faster on hypertables.

Q: What’s a CTE and when do you use it vs subquery vs view?
A: CTE (Common Table Expression): WITH t AS (...) SELECT ... FROM t. Readable, can be self-referential (recursive), scoped to one query. Subquery: inline (SELECT ...). Fine for one-off; gets messy when nested. View: persistent named query. Use when reusing the same logic across many queries. CTEs in modern Postgres are inlined by the planner (since v12) so there’s no performance penalty — readability wins.

Q: Write a query to find tags with values that haven’t changed in the last hour.
A: WITH recent AS (
    SELECT
        tag_id,
        MIN(value) AS min_v,
        MAX(value) AS max_v,
        COUNT(*) AS n
    FROM readings
    WHERE ts >= NOW() - INTERVAL &#39;1 hour&#39;
    GROUP BY tag_id
)
SELECT tag_id, min_v
FROM recent
WHERE n > 1 AND min_v = max_v;
A “frozen tag” detector. The n > 1 clause filters out tags with only one reading (which would trivially be “unchanged”).

Q: Detect duplicate readings (same tag, same timestamp).
A: SELECT tag_id, ts, COUNT(*) AS dups
FROM readings
GROUP BY tag_id, ts
HAVING COUNT(*) > 1;
For dedup with windowing:
WITH ranked AS (
    SELECT *, ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY tag_id, ts ORDER BY inserted_at DESC) AS rn
    FROM readings
)
DELETE FROM readings WHERE (tag_id, ts) IN (
    SELECT tag_id, ts FROM ranked WHERE rn > 1
);
(Use a transaction.)

Q: Compute hourly tag value statistics with gap fill.
A: SELECT
    time_bucket_gapfill(&#39;1 hour&#39;, ts) AS hour,
    tag_id,
    AVG(value) AS avg_v,
    MIN(value) AS min_v,
    MAX(value) AS max_v,
    COUNT(*) AS n,
    LOCF(AVG(value)) AS avg_locf
FROM readings
WHERE ts BETWEEN &#39;2026-05-01&#39; AND &#39;2026-05-08&#39;
  AND tag_id = &#39;PT_101&#39;
GROUP BY hour, tag_id
ORDER BY hour;
LOCF = Last Observation Carried Forward. Returns the previous bucket’s value when the current bucket has none.

Q: What’s a self-join and when would you use one?
A: A table joined to itself, typically via aliases. Useful for hierarchical data (employee/manager), comparing rows within a table (consecutive events), graph-like queries. For time-series, window functions usually replace self-joins more cleanly. Old pattern:
SELECT a.day, a.value, b.value AS prev_value
FROM daily a
LEFT JOIN daily b ON b.day = a.day - INTERVAL &#39;1 day&#39;;
Modern equivalent:
SELECT day, value, LAG(value) OVER (ORDER BY day) AS prev_value FROM daily;
The window version is shorter, faster, and easier to read.

Q: How do indexes work and why do they matter?
A: An index is a sorted data structure (typically B-tree) that lets you find rows by key in O(log n) instead of O(n). Indexes speed up SELECT, slow down INSERT/UPDATE/DELETE (because the index must be maintained), and consume disk space. For time-series tables: the natural index is (series_key, ts DESC) for “give me the latest values for series X.” TimescaleDB hypertables build chunked indexes automatically. For Postgres, also know BRIN (block range index) for huge ordered tables — much smaller than B-tree, decent on time-ordered data.

Q: What’s an EXPLAIN plan and how do you read one?
A: EXPLAIN [ANALYZE] <query> shows the planner’s chosen execution path. Read top-down: each node is an operation (Seq Scan, Index Scan, Hash Join, etc.); costs are estimated CPU+IO. EXPLAIN ANALYZE actually runs the query and shows real timings — way more useful than the estimates. Look for: sequential scans on large tables (need index), hash joins on tiny tables (probably fine), nested loops on huge tables (suspect), nodes where actual rows >> estimated rows (stale stats — ANALYZE the table).

Q: What’s the difference between INNER JOIN, LEFT JOIN, FULL OUTER JOIN?
A: INNER JOIN returns only rows with matches in both tables. LEFT JOIN returns all rows from left, NULLs for non-matching right. FULL OUTER JOIN returns all rows from both, NULLs where no match. For “list all tags including those with no readings”: LEFT JOIN tags to readings. For “find tags without recent readings”: LEFT JOIN with WHERE readings.ts IS NULL.

Q: What’s a correlated subquery?
A: A subquery that references the outer query — it runs once per outer row. Often slow but sometimes the cleanest. Modern alternative: window functions or LATERAL joins.
SELECT t.tag_id,
       (SELECT value FROM readings r
        WHERE r.tag_id = t.tag_id ORDER BY r.ts DESC LIMIT 1) AS latest
FROM tags t;
Faster modern equivalent:
SELECT t.tag_id, r.value
FROM tags t
LEFT JOIN LATERAL (
    SELECT value FROM readings r2
    WHERE r2.tag_id = t.tag_id
    ORDER BY r2.ts DESC LIMIT 1
) r ON true;
LATERAL lets the subquery reference the outer row, but the planner can do better than per-row correlated execution.

Q: How do you handle NULL in aggregate functions?
A: COUNT(*) counts all rows; COUNT(column) counts non-NULL values. SUM, AVG, MIN, MAX ignore NULL. Common gotcha: AVG(x) over a column with 50% NULLs gives the average of the non-NULL half, not the average treating NULL as zero. If you want NULL-as-zero behavior, AVG(COALESCE(x, 0)). Always be explicit about NULL handling — interviews probe this.

Q: Write a query that finds the longest run of consecutive Good-quality readings per tag.
A: This is a “gaps and islands” problem.
WITH islands AS (
    SELECT tag_id, ts, value, quality,
        ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY tag_id ORDER BY ts)
        - ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY tag_id, quality ORDER BY ts)
            AS island_id
    FROM readings
)
SELECT tag_id, MIN(ts) AS run_start, MAX(ts) AS run_end,
       COUNT(*) AS run_length
FROM islands
WHERE quality = 1   -- Good
GROUP BY tag_id, island_id
ORDER BY run_length DESC;
The trick: subtract two ROW_NUMBERs, one over the whole partition and one over (partition, status). Within a contiguous run of the same status, the difference is constant — that’s your island ID.

Q: What’s a window frame default and when does it bite you?
A: When you write SUM(x) OVER (ORDER BY ts) with an ORDER BY but no explicit frame, the default is RANGE BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW — a running total. Without ORDER BY, the default is the entire partition. Subtle bug: LAST_VALUE(x) OVER (ORDER BY ts) returns the current row’s value because the default frame ends at the current row, not the partition end. Fix: explicit frame ROWS BETWEEN UNBOUNDED PRECEDING AND UNBOUNDED FOLLOWING.

Q: What’s a common table expression vs a temporary table?
A: CTE: query-scoped, in-memory, no persistence. Temp table: session-scoped, can be indexed, can be referenced multiple times in a session. For complex multi-step transformations where the same intermediate result is used many times, a temp table can be faster (compute once, reuse). For one-off queries, CTEs are cleaner.

Q: How do you optimize a slow time-series query?
A: Diagnostic checklist: (1) Time range filter — does the query restrict the time range? Without it, you’re scanning the whole hypertable. (2) Index on (series_key, ts) — present? (3) Partition pruning — does the EXPLAIN show it touching only the relevant chunks? (4) Aggregates pushed down — TimescaleDB can compute aggregates per chunk in parallel. (5) Continuous aggregate available — for a recurring query, materialize it. (6) Compression status — querying compressed chunks is fine but slower; if a query is hot, keep its data uncompressed. (7) work_mem setting — too low forces sorts to disk.

Q: Show me a query that computes percentile for sensor readings.
A: SELECT
    tag_id,
    PERCENTILE_CONT(0.5) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY value) AS median,
    PERCENTILE_CONT(0.95) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY value) AS p95,
    PERCENTILE_CONT(0.99) WITHIN GROUP (ORDER BY value) AS p99
FROM readings
WHERE ts BETWEEN NOW() - INTERVAL &#39;24 hours&#39; AND NOW()
GROUP BY tag_id;
PERCENTILE_CONT is interpolated; PERCENTILE_DISC returns an actual data point. For approximate percentiles on huge data, look at TimescaleDB’s percentile_agg or InfluxDB’s approximate quantile functions — way faster than exact.

Q: Walk me through how you’d debug a SQL query returning wrong results.
A: (1) Strip it down. Reduce to the minimal version that still shows the issue. (2) Verify input data. Run the inner-most subquery alone — does its output look right? (3) Check JOIN cardinality. A LEFT JOIN that should add 0 rows but adds duplicates means the join key isn’t unique on the right side. (4) Check NULL handling. WHERE x = 5 excludes rows where x IS NULL. x != 5 does too. Use IS NULL / IS NOT NULL explicitly. (5) Check time zone handling. TIMESTAMP vs TIMESTAMPTZ is a real source of bugs — values shift by 5 hours and you find out at 11 PM. (6) Compare against a known-good source. If the SCADA HMI shows a different value than your query, your query is wrong (or the SCADA is — verify both).

SECTION H — APIs (REST, FastAPI, Flask, gRPC)
25 Q&As — FastAPI is the JD’s named framework

Q: What is REST?
A: Representational State Transfer — Roy Fielding’s 2000 PhD thesis. An architectural style, not a protocol. Core constraints: stateless (server doesn’t remember client between requests), uniform interface (resources identified by URIs, manipulated by HTTP verbs), cacheable responses, layered architecture, client-server separation. In practice “REST” today means “HTTP API with JSON payloads, using verbs (GET/POST/PUT/DELETE) and status codes” — a loose interpretation Fielding has criticized. For interviews, knowing both the original constraints and the practical reality is gold.

Q: What’s the difference between PUT and PATCH?
A: PUT is idempotent and replaces the entire resource. Sending PUT twice with the same body has the same effect as sending once. PATCH applies a partial update — only the fields you send are modified. PATCH isn’t required to be idempotent (depends on the patch format). For a senior interview, also know JSON Patch (RFC 6902) vs JSON Merge Patch (RFC 7396) — two different ways to encode the change.

Q: What HTTP status codes should I know?
A: 200 OK — success
201 Created — resource created (with Location header)
202 Accepted — async operation queued
204 No Content — success, no body
301/302 — redirects (permanent / temporary)
400 Bad Request — malformed request
401 Unauthorized — auth required or invalid
403 Forbidden — authenticated but not allowed
404 Not Found — resource doesn’t exist
409 Conflict — concurrent modification, business rule violation
422 Unprocessable Entity — validation error (FastAPI’s default for Pydantic errors)
429 Too Many Requests — rate limited (with Retry-After header)
500 Internal Server Error — your bug
502/503/504 — gateway issues, service unavailable, timeout
Senior touch: distinguish 401 (no/bad credentials) from 403 (good credentials, not allowed). Distinguish 400 (syntactic) from 422 (semantic).

Q: What’s idempotency and why does it matter for APIs?
A: An idempotent operation produces the same result whether called once or N times. GET, PUT, DELETE are idempotent by spec; POST is not. Why it matters: network retries. If a client times out and retries, an idempotent operation is safe; a non-idempotent one may double-charge or double-create. Pattern for non-idempotent ops: accept an Idempotency-Key header and persist the (key, result) so repeat requests return the cached result.

Q: What’s FastAPI and why has it taken over?
A: A modern Python web framework built on Starlette + Pydantic, designed for async APIs. Wins: automatic OpenAPI/Swagger docs from type hints, automatic request validation via Pydantic, native async support, excellent dependency injection. Performance: roughly on par with Node.js / Go for typical workloads. Adoption: has surpassed Flask in new project starts since ~2023. For a senior Python role in 2026, FastAPI is the default expectation.

Q: Show me a basic FastAPI endpoint.
A: from datetime import datetime
from fastapi import FastAPI, HTTPException
from pydantic import BaseModel, Field

app = FastAPI(title="SCADA API", version="1.0.0")

class TagReading(BaseModel):
    tag_id: str = Field(..., min_length=1)
    timestamp: datetime
    value: float
    quality: int = 0

@app.post("/readings", status_code=201)
async def ingest_reading(reading: TagReading) -> dict:
    if reading.quality not in (0, 1, 2):
        raise HTTPException(422, detail="Invalid quality")
    # ...persist...
    return {"status": "ok", "tag_id": reading.tag_id}

@app.get("/readings/{tag_id}")
async def get_latest(tag_id: str) -> TagReading:
    reading = await fetch_latest(tag_id)
    if not reading:
        raise HTTPException(404, detail=f"No readings for {tag_id}")
    return reading
Note: type hints drive everything — request validation, response serialization, OpenAPI generation.

Q: Explain FastAPI’s dependency injection.
A: Depends() declares a dependency; FastAPI resolves it before calling the endpoint, caches it for the request, and supports nested dependencies.
from fastapi import Depends, FastAPI
import asyncpg

async def get_db_pool():
    return app.state.pool

async def get_current_user(token: str = Header(...)):
    return await verify_token(token)

@app.get("/readings/{tag_id}")
async def get_readings(
    tag_id: str,
    pool: asyncpg.Pool = Depends(get_db_pool),
    user: User = Depends(get_current_user),
):
    return await fetch(pool, tag_id, user.scope)
Dependencies are themselves callables — they can be functions, classes (with __call__), or async. Why it matters: clean separation of cross-cutting concerns (auth, DB, logging) from business logic, with full testability.

Q: How do you handle authentication in FastAPI?
A: Multiple patterns. API key — simple Header(...) dependency that validates against a store. JWT bearer token — OAuth2PasswordBearer + JWT decoding in a dependency. OAuth2 flows — FastAPI has built-in helpers for password, client credentials, authorization code. Mutual TLS — handled at the proxy/load balancer layer typically. For an industrial API in a corporate environment, expect either an enterprise SSO (OAuth2 + OIDC) or a service-to-service mTLS pattern.

Q: How do you handle WebSockets in FastAPI?
A: from fastapi import WebSocket, WebSocketDisconnect

@app.websocket("/stream/{tag_id}")
async def stream_tag(websocket: WebSocket, tag_id: str):
    await websocket.accept()
    try:
        async for value in subscribe_to_tag(tag_id):
            await websocket.send_json({"tag_id": tag_id, "value": value})
    except WebSocketDisconnect:
        pass
Useful for streaming SCADA tags to a dashboard. Handle disconnect cleanly. For production, multiplex through a single WebSocket per client and let clients subscribe to multiple tags over the same connection.

Q: How do you handle background tasks in FastAPI?
A: BackgroundTasks for fire-and-forget work tied to a response:
from fastapi import BackgroundTasks

@app.post("/readings")
async def ingest(reading: TagReading, bg: BackgroundTasks):
    await persist(reading)
    bg.add_task(notify_alarm_engine, reading)
    return {"status": "ok"}
For anything that needs durability, retries, or runs >> response time: use Celery, RQ, Dramatiq, or arq (async). Don’t use BackgroundTasks for “send 1000 emails” — the response will hang and a server restart loses them.

Q: What’s middleware in FastAPI?
A: A function that wraps every request — runs before the endpoint, after the endpoint, or both. Use for logging, request IDs, CORS, custom headers, timing, rate limiting.
from fastapi import Request
import time, uuid

@app.middleware("http")
async def add_request_id(request: Request, call_next):
    request_id = str(uuid.uuid4())
    start = time.perf_counter()
    response = await call_next(request)
    duration = time.perf_counter() - start
    response.headers["X-Request-ID"] = request_id
    response.headers["X-Duration-Ms"] = f"{duration*1000:.1f}"
    return response
For CORS, use fastapi.middleware.cors.CORSMiddleware — built-in.

Q: What’s the OpenAPI / Swagger documentation FastAPI generates?
A: FastAPI introspects your route definitions, type hints, and Pydantic models to produce a complete OpenAPI 3 spec at /openapi.json and an interactive Swagger UI at /docs (and ReDoc at /redoc). For senior engineers: customize via Field(..., examples=[...]), response_model=, responses={} arg with multiple status codes, and tag groupings. Disable in production if you don’t want the API surface public, or protect it with auth.

Q: FastAPI vs Flask?
A: Aspect
FastAPI
Flask
Async
Native
Bolt-on (via async views in 2.x)
Validation
Auto via Pydantic
Manual or via marshmallow
OpenAPI
Auto-generated
Manual or via flask-restx
Performance
High (Starlette)
Lower (WSGI)
Ecosystem
Growing fast
Mature, huge
Learning curve
Type hints required
More forgiving
Best for
New APIs, async workloads
Legacy, small services, sync
For a new senior-grade backend in 2026, FastAPI. For maintaining an existing Flask codebase, stay with Flask.

Q: What’s a typical FastAPI project structure?
A: my_api/
├── pyproject.toml
├── src/
│   └── my_api/
│       ├── __init__.py
│       ├── main.py              # FastAPI() instance, routers mounted
│       ├── config.py            # Pydantic Settings
│       ├── db.py                # connection pool, session
│       ├── deps.py              # shared Dependencies
│       ├── routers/
│       │   ├── readings.py      # /readings endpoints
│       │   └── tags.py          # /tags endpoints
│       ├── schemas/             # Pydantic models (request/response)
│       ├── services/            # business logic
│       └── repositories/        # DB access
└── tests/
Domain organization (readings/, tags/) > layer organization (controllers/, services/, models/).

Q: How do you test a FastAPI app?
A: fastapi.testclient.TestClient wraps the app:
from fastapi.testclient import TestClient
from my_api.main import app

client = TestClient(app)

def test_ingest():
    resp = client.post("/readings", json={
        "tag_id": "PT_101", "timestamp": "2026-05-08T14:30:00Z",
        "value": 123.45, "quality": 0
    })
    assert resp.status_code == 201
    assert resp.json()["tag_id"] == "PT_101"
For async-specific testing, use httpx.AsyncClient with app=app. For DB tests, use a transaction-rolled-back fixture or a separate test schema.

Q: How do you handle pagination?
A: Three common patterns. Offset/limit — ?offset=100&limit=50. Simple, but slow on large tables (Postgres has to skip 100 rows). Cursor-based — ?cursor=abc123&limit=50, where cursor is opaque (often a base64-encoded last-seen primary key + sort field). Stable across inserts. Page-based — ?page=3&page_size=50. Same problems as offset. For time-series APIs: cursor-based on timestamp is best — ?since=2026-05-08T14:00:00Z&limit=1000.

Q: How do you handle rate limiting?
A: In-process: slowapi (FastAPI-friendly wrapper of Flask-Limiter). Distributed: a Redis-backed token bucket. At the edge: API gateway (AWS API Gateway, Kong, Nginx). For an industrial API where multiple clients ingest data, rate limit per client (API key or auth token) not per IP. Headers to return: X-RateLimit-Limit, X-RateLimit-Remaining, X-RateLimit-Reset, and 429 with Retry-After when exceeded.

Q: What’s gRPC and when would you use it over REST?
A: gRPC — Google’s RPC framework over HTTP/2 with Protobuf serialization. Wins: faster (binary, multiplexed), strongly typed (Protobuf schemas), bidirectional streaming, language-neutral generated stubs. Losses: less browser-friendly (gRPC-Web is the workaround), tooling is less mature than REST, Protobuf adds a build step. Use gRPC for: internal microservice-to-microservice traffic, streaming workloads, polyglot environments. Use REST for: external-facing APIs, ease of debugging, broad client support. The JD mentions “REST or gRPC” — be conversant in both.

Q: Show me a Python gRPC server skeleton.
A: # scada.proto
# service ScadaService {
#   rpc GetTag (TagRequest) returns (TagResponse);
#   rpc StreamTag (TagRequest) returns (stream TagReading);
# }

import grpc
from concurrent import futures
import scada_pb2, scada_pb2_grpc

class ScadaService(scada_pb2_grpc.ScadaServiceServicer):
    def GetTag(self, request, context):
        return scada_pb2.TagResponse(tag_id=request.tag_id, value=fetch(request.tag_id))

    def StreamTag(self, request, context):
        for reading in subscribe(request.tag_id):
            yield scada_pb2.TagReading(
                tag_id=request.tag_id,
                ts=reading.ts.isoformat(),
                value=reading.value,
            )

def serve():
    server = grpc.server(futures.ThreadPoolExecutor(max_workers=10))
    scada_pb2_grpc.add_ScadaServiceServicer_to_server(ScadaService(), server)
    server.add_insecure_port(&#39;[::]:50051&#39;)
    server.start()
    server.wait_for_termination()
For async: grpc.aio.server() and async def methods.

Q: What’s CORS?
A: Cross-Origin Resource Sharing. Browsers enforce same-origin policy by default; CORS is the protocol that lets a server explicitly opt in to cross-origin requests via Access-Control-Allow-* headers. For backend APIs: if a JS frontend on a different domain calls your API, you need CORS. If only server-to-server calls hit your API, you don’t. FastAPI: app.add_middleware(CORSMiddleware, allow_origins=["https://dashboard.acme.com"], ...). Don’t wildcard allow_origins=["*"] in production with credentials.

Q: What’s an API gateway and what does it do?
A: A proxy that sits in front of your API services. Handles cross-cutting concerns: TLS termination, authentication, rate limiting, request routing, request/response transformation, observability. Examples: AWS API Gateway, Kong, Tyk, KrakenD, Apigee. For an industrial API: the gateway often handles mTLS for client identification, rate limiting per tenant, and routing across multiple internal services. Without a gateway, every service has to reimplement these.

Q: How do you version an API?
A: Three approaches. URL path: /v1/readings, /v2/readings — common, explicit. Header: Accept: application/vnd.acme.v2+json — RESTier, harder to test in browser. Query param: ?version=2 — discouraged. For a new API, URL path versioning is the practical default. Internal microservices often skip versioning because both sides deploy together.

Q: How do you handle long-running operations in a REST API?
A: 202 Accepted pattern: client POSTs the operation, server returns 202 with a Location header pointing to a status URL. Client polls the status URL. When complete, status returns the result (or another URL with the result). For very long ops (hours), webhooks: client provides a callback URL, server POSTs to it on completion. Don’t make the client hold a request open for minutes — connections are flaky.

Q: What’s HATEOAS and do I care?
A: Hypermedia as the Engine of Application State — Fielding’s principle that REST responses should include links to related resources. Few real APIs implement it strictly. Mention it if asked — most senior interviewers don’t dwell on it. Practical takeaway: include some discoverability in responses (links, related resource IDs) to reduce client coupling.

Q: Walk me through how you’d design a REST API for ingesting and querying time-series data.
A: Endpoints: - POST /v1/ingest — accepts a batch of readings. Validates with Pydantic. Returns 202 if async, 201 if sync. Idempotency-Key header support. - GET /v1/tags — list tags with metadata. Supports ?asset_id= filter. Cursor pagination. - GET /v1/tags/{tag_id} — single tag metadata. - GET /v1/tags/{tag_id}/readings?from=&to=&step=&agg= — time-range query, optional bucket size and aggregation. Cursor pagination if results are large. - GET /v1/tags/{tag_id}/latest — most recent value. - WS /v1/stream — WebSocket subscribing to multiple tags. - GET /healthz, GET /readyz — Kubernetes probes. - GET /metrics — Prometheus.
Cross-cutting: OAuth2 bearer auth, rate limiting per client, OpenAPI docs, request IDs propagated as X-Request-ID.
This is the answer they want for “design an API for industrial data.”

Section I — Real-time Pipelines: Kafka, Flink, Spark Streaming (Q241–265)

Q: What is Apache Kafka and what problem does it solve?
A: A distributed, append-only log. Producers write messages to topics, consumers read at their own pace. The core idea: decouple producers from consumers using a durable log as the buffer. Solves the N×M integration problem (N producers each writing custom code to M consumers becomes N+M producers/consumers writing to/from Kafka). For industrial: PLCs/SCADA gateways publish tag updates to Kafka topics; downstream consumers (TSDB writers, anomaly detectors, dashboards, ML models) subscribe independently. If a consumer goes down, messages stay in the log and it catches up on restart.

Q: Explain Kafka’s core concepts: topic, partition, offset, consumer group.
A: Topic: named stream of messages (e.g., scada.readings.raw).
Partition: topic is split into ordered, immutable partitions distributed across brokers. Order is guaranteed within a partition, not across.
Offset: monotonic ID of a message within a partition. Consumers track which offset they’ve processed.
Consumer group: group of consumers that share work — each partition is assigned to exactly one consumer in the group. Add more consumers (up to partition count) to scale read throughput.
Replication factor: each partition has N copies on different brokers for fault tolerance. One leader handles reads/writes, followers replicate.

Q: How do you decide partition count for a Kafka topic?
A: Partition count is the unit of parallelism — it sets the maximum consumer parallelism. Too few: bottleneck. Too many: rebalance overhead, file handle pressure on brokers, ZooKeeper/KRaft metadata bloat. Practical heuristic: target throughput ÷ per-consumer throughput, with a small multiplier for headroom. For industrial telemetry: 10–50 partitions for a primary readings topic is typical. Hard to increase later without losing key→partition affinity, so start higher than you think you need.

Q: What does the partition key do?
A: Producer hashes the key (default murmur2) and uses it to choose a partition. All messages with the same key go to the same partition, which guarantees per-key ordering. For SCADA: use tag_id as the key — all updates for tag WELL_42.TEMP land in the same partition, so a downstream consumer sees them in order. No key → round-robin assignment.

Q: What delivery guarantees does Kafka offer?
A: Three levels. At-most-once: producer doesn’t retry; consumer commits offset before processing. Lost messages possible. At-least-once (default): producer retries on failure; consumer commits after processing. Duplicates possible. Exactly-once: Kafka transactions + idempotent producer + read-committed consumer. Real cost: throughput overhead, complexity. For industrial telemetry: at-least-once + idempotent downstream writes is the right tradeoff. TSDB writes are idempotent on (tag_id, timestamp) so duplicates are harmless.

Q: What’s an idempotent producer?
A: enable.idempotence=true makes the producer assign a sequence number per partition; the broker rejects duplicates within a producer session. Cheap to enable (sets acks=all, retries=Integer.MAX_VALUE automatically) and prevents duplicates from in-flight retries. Always turn this on in production.

Q: Walk through producing to Kafka from Python.
A: from confluent_kafka import Producer
import json

producer = Producer({
    &#39;bootstrap.servers&#39;: &#39;kafka1:9092,kafka2:9092&#39;,
    &#39;enable.idempotence&#39;: True,
    &#39;acks&#39;: &#39;all&#39;,
    &#39;compression.type&#39;: &#39;zstd&#39;,
    &#39;linger.ms&#39;: 20,
    &#39;batch.size&#39;: 65536,
})

def delivery_report(err, msg):
    if err is not None:
        log.error(f&#39;Delivery failed: {err}&#39;)

reading = {&#39;tag_id&#39;: &#39;WELL_42.TEMP&#39;, &#39;ts&#39;: &#39;2026-05-08T12:00:00Z&#39;, &#39;value&#39;: 78.4}
producer.produce(
    topic=&#39;scada.readings.raw&#39;,
    key=reading[&#39;tag_id&#39;].encode(),
    value=json.dumps(reading).encode(),
    callback=delivery_report,
)
producer.flush()  # ensure all in-flight messages delivered
linger.ms and batch.size control batching — bigger batches = better throughput, more end-to-end latency. For high-volume telemetry, linger 10–50ms is fine.

Q: Walk through consuming from Kafka in Python.
A: from confluent_kafka import Consumer

consumer = Consumer({
    &#39;bootstrap.servers&#39;: &#39;kafka:9092&#39;,
    &#39;group.id&#39;: &#39;tsdb-writer&#39;,
    &#39;auto.offset.reset&#39;: &#39;earliest&#39;,
    &#39;enable.auto.commit&#39;: False,  # commit manually after successful write
})
consumer.subscribe([&#39;scada.readings.raw&#39;])

while True:
    msg = consumer.poll(1.0)
    if msg is None:
        continue
    if msg.error():
        log.error(msg.error()); continue
    try:
        write_to_tsdb(json.loads(msg.value()))
        consumer.commit(msg)  # commit only after success
    except Exception:
        log.exception(&#39;processing failed&#39;)
        # don&#39;t commit → message redelivered
Key point: enable.auto.commit=False and commit after successful processing → at-least-once. If you commit before processing, you risk losing messages on crash.

Q: What’s a consumer rebalance and why does it cause pain?
A: When consumers join/leave a group or the topic’s partition count changes, Kafka reassigns partitions across surviving consumers. During rebalance, all consumption pauses. Long-running message processing can trigger session timeout → spurious rebalance → cascading delay. Mitigations: keep max.poll.interval.ms higher than your worst-case processing time, use incremental cooperative rebalancing (Kafka 2.4+), keep processing fast (offload heavy work).

Q: What’s Kafka Connect and when would you use it?
A: A framework for moving data in and out of Kafka without writing code. Source connectors pull from external systems into Kafka; sink connectors push from Kafka to external systems. For industrial: sink connectors to InfluxDB, TimescaleDB, S3, Elasticsearch are off-the-shelf. Source connectors for OPC-UA, MQTT exist (Confluent, third-party). Use Connect when: you’re moving data without transformation. Skip Connect when: you need custom enrichment, joining, complex stateful logic — that’s Flink/Streams territory.

Q: Kafka Streams vs Apache Flink — which would you pick?
A: Kafka Streams: library embedded in your Java/Scala app. Simpler ops (no separate cluster), tightly coupled to Kafka. Great for stateless or moderately stateful per-key processing. Flink: distributed processing engine. Stronger semantics (true event-time, exactly-once across sources/sinks, sophisticated windowing), supports many sources/sinks beyond Kafka, has a SQL frontend. For an industrial data platform with mixed sources (Kafka + JDBC + Kinesis), complex windowing, large state — Flink wins. For simple per-key transforms inside an existing Java team — Streams. (Honest answer for an interviewer: I haven’t operated either at production scale; my Python production work used custom consumers + downstream services.)

Q: What’s event-time vs processing-time?
A: Event-time: the timestamp embedded in the event (when the sensor measured). Processing-time: when your stream processor sees it. They diverge because of network delays, buffering, retries — events arrive out of order and late. For industrial: a tag value timestamped 12:00:05 might arrive at 12:00:30 because the gateway buffered it. Aggregations should almost always use event-time. Otherwise a 1-minute average bucket includes whatever happened to arrive in that minute, not what was measured.

Q: What’s a watermark in stream processing?
A: A heuristic that says “we believe all events with timestamps ≤ T have arrived.” Watermarks let the processor close event-time windows and emit results without waiting forever. Set conservatively (allow lateness): trade off latency vs completeness. Late events past the watermark are either dropped, sent to a side output, or trigger an update — application choice.

Q: Tumbling vs sliding vs session windows.
A: Tumbling: fixed, non-overlapping. 1-minute tumbling = [12:00, 12:01), [12:01, 12:02). Use for periodic aggregates (1-min averages).
Sliding: fixed size, overlapping by a slide interval. 5-min size, 1-min slide = updates every minute with the last 5 minutes’ data. Use for rolling KPIs.
Session: dynamic size based on inactivity gap. New event within gap → extend window; gap exceeds threshold → close. Use for grouping bursts (e.g., user clickstream sessions, equipment cycles).

Q: Spark Streaming vs Spark Structured Streaming.
A: Old Spark Streaming was DStream-based, micro-batch only, processing-time semantics. Structured Streaming (Spark 2.0+) is the supported one — DataFrame API, supports event-time, watermarks, continuous mode (low latency). For senior interview: just say “Structured Streaming” — assume Structured.

Q: Spark Structured Streaming vs Flink — when to choose?
A: Structured Streaming: strong fit when the team already runs Spark for batch (unified API, single skillset), and latency requirements are 1-second+. Flink: stronger streaming-first semantics, lower latency (true streaming, not micro-batch by default), better for complex stateful processing and windowing. Honest interview answer: “If the team is Spark-shaped, I’d use Structured Streaming. If we’re greenfield and latency matters, I’d evaluate Flink.”

Q: How do you handle out-of-order events?
A: Three tools. Event-time + watermarks: processor handles reordering inside a tolerance window. Allowed lateness: event arrives after watermark but within lateness budget → window updated. Side outputs: events past the lateness budget are routed elsewhere for inspection or batch reprocessing. For SCADA: I’d set lateness to ~30s (typical gateway buffer), drop events older than 5min to a quarantine topic for review.

Q: What’s exactly-once across Kafka + Flink + sink?
A: End-to-end exactly-once requires: idempotent or transactional source (Kafka with consumer transactions), processor that checkpoints state and offsets atomically (Flink’s checkpoint barriers), and a transactional sink (Kafka with transactions, JDBC with 2PC, or idempotent writes keyed by event ID). Cost: latency (checkpoint intervals), throughput hit, sink complexity. Don’t claim exactly-once if you don’t need it — at-least-once + idempotent writes is usually cheaper and simpler.

Q: How do you backpressure a stream pipeline?
A: Without backpressure, fast producers + slow consumer = unbounded memory growth → OOM. Solutions: bounded buffers (block producer when full), credit-based flow control (consumer signals capacity, Flink does this automatically), Kafka acts as the buffer — naturally backpressures because lag builds in the broker, not in your process. For Kafka pipelines, lag is the backpressure signal. Watch consumer-group lag with Burrow or LinkedIn Cruise Control.

Q: Schema registry — what is it and why do you care?
A: Centralized service holding Avro/Protobuf/JSON schemas. Producers register schemas, consumers fetch by ID. The point: you can evolve schemas without breaking consumers — registry enforces compatibility (BACKWARD, FORWARD, FULL). For industrial: tags, units, asset metadata change over time; schema registry prevents the “we added a field and now nothing parses” outage. Confluent Schema Registry, Apicurio, AWS Glue Schema Registry are the common ones.

Q: Avro vs Protobuf vs JSON for Kafka payloads.
A: JSON: human-readable, no schema enforced. Fine for low-volume, easy debugging. Wasteful at scale.
Avro: compact binary, schema-required (registry-friendly), evolves cleanly. Standard in the Kafka ecosystem.
Protobuf: compact binary, schema via .proto, language-neutral, fast. Strong gRPC story.
For high-volume SCADA: Avro or Protobuf (5–10× smaller than JSON). For low-volume control-plane events: JSON is fine.

Q: Kafka log compaction — when and why?
A: Compacted topics keep only the latest message per key, garbage-collecting old values. Use case: changelog/state topics. Example: tag metadata. The topic stores (tag_id → metadata); on compaction, only the latest metadata per tag_id survives. Replaying the topic from offset 0 gives you a complete current snapshot. Don’t compact telemetry topics — you’d lose history.

Q: How do you handle a “poison message” in a Kafka consumer?
A: A message your consumer can’t process (malformed JSON, schema mismatch, NPE-triggering data). If the consumer keeps retrying, you block the partition forever. Pattern: dead-letter topic. After N retries, write the bad message + error metadata to <topic>.dlq, commit the offset, move on. Investigate DLQ separately. Without a DLQ, one bad message stops your pipeline — common production outage.

Q: What metrics do you watch on a Kafka cluster and consumer?
A: Cluster: under-replicated partitions, ISR shrink count, leader election rate, request handler/network thread idle %, broker disk usage. Consumer: consumer-group lag (per partition), records-consumed-rate, fetch-latency, commit-latency. The single most important alert: consumer-group lag growing. That’s how you find out something downstream is broken before users do.

Q: Real-time pipeline I’d build for SCADA telemetry — quick sketch.
A: Source: SCADA gateway (or OPC-UA → MQTT bridge) publishes tag updates to Kafka topic scada.readings.raw, partitioned by tag_id, Avro-serialized via schema registry. Stream layer: stateful processor (Flink job or Python consumer + Redis) for enrichment (join with tag metadata), filtering, derived calculations (rate-of-change alarms). Outputs to scada.readings.enriched. Sinks: TSDB writer (TimescaleDB or InfluxDB), anomaly detector, audit log to S3 for cold storage. Observability: Prometheus on consumer lag, Grafana dashboards, alerts on lag > 60s. Idempotent writes everywhere so retries are safe. That’s the architecture I’d pitch on day one.
Section J — Docker, Kubernetes, CI/CD (Q266–285)

Q: What is Docker and why use it?
A: A way to package an application with all its dependencies (OS libs, language runtime, config) into a portable image that runs identically anywhere. Built on Linux namespaces + cgroups. Why it matters for industrial: SCADA stacks have brutal dependency hell (OPC-UA SDKs, vendor libs, specific Python versions). A container image freezes that. Without containers, every deploy is a hand-rolled artifact with environment drift.

Q: Walk through a production Dockerfile for a Python FastAPI service.
A: # Multi-stage: builder + runtime
FROM python:3.12-slim AS builder
WORKDIR /app
RUN apt-get update && apt-get install -y --no-install-recommends \
    build-essential && rm -rf /var/lib/apt/lists/*
RUN pip install --no-cache-dir uv
COPY pyproject.toml uv.lock ./
RUN uv sync --frozen --no-dev

FROM python:3.12-slim AS runtime
WORKDIR /app
RUN useradd -r -u 1001 appuser
COPY --from=builder /app/.venv /app/.venv
ENV PATH="/app/.venv/bin:$PATH" PYTHONUNBUFFERED=1
COPY --chown=appuser:appuser src/ ./src/
USER appuser
EXPOSE 8000
HEALTHCHECK --interval=30s --timeout=3s CMD curl -f http://localhost:8000/healthz || exit 1
CMD ["uvicorn", "src.main:app", "--host", "0.0.0.0", "--port", "8000"]
Key points: multi-stage (small runtime), non-root user, healthcheck, frozen lockfile, no build tools in runtime image, PYTHONUNBUFFERED so stdout isn’t swallowed.

Q: Why multi-stage builds?
A: To exclude build-time dependencies (compilers, build tools, dev packages) from the runtime image. Smaller images = faster pulls, smaller attack surface, fewer CVEs. A naïve image is often 1.5GB; multi-stage cuts it to 150–250MB.

Q: Why not run as root in a container?
A: Container root maps to host root by default — a container escape gives the attacker root on the node. Running as a non-root user is defense-in-depth. Kubernetes can enforce this with runAsNonRoot: true in PodSecurityContext + admission controllers.

Q: What’s the difference between CMD and ENTRYPOINT?
A: ENTRYPOINT defines the executable; CMD provides default arguments. Pattern for services: ENTRYPOINT ["uvicorn"] + CMD ["src.main:app", "--host", "0.0.0.0"]. User can override args without changing the binary. Pattern for general images: just CMD ["uvicorn", ...] — both behaviors collapse, easier to reason about.

Q: What is Kubernetes and the core resources?
A: Container orchestration platform. Core resources: - Pod: smallest unit, one or more containers sharing network/storage. Usually one container per pod. - Deployment: declarative spec for stateless replicas. Handles rolling updates. - Service: stable network endpoint over a set of pods (selected by labels). Types: ClusterIP, NodePort, LoadBalancer. - Ingress: L7 routing (host/path → service). - ConfigMap / Secret: non-sensitive / sensitive config injected as env vars or files. - StatefulSet: stable identity + storage (databases, brokers). - DaemonSet: one pod per node (logging agents, node exporters). - Job / CronJob: batch / scheduled work.

Q: Liveness vs readiness vs startup probes.
A: Liveness: is the container alive? Failing → kubelet kills + restarts. Use for deadlock detection. Don’t use heavy checks.
Readiness: is the container ready to serve traffic? Failing → removed from Service endpoints (no traffic), but not killed. Use to gate traffic during startup or transient downstream issues.
Startup: for slow-starting apps. Liveness/readiness pause until startup passes. Prevents slow boots from being killed mid-init.
Common bug: wiring liveness to a downstream dependency (DB, Kafka). When DB blips, liveness fails, all replicas get killed, cascading outage. Liveness probes should only test the local process. Use readiness for downstream health.

Q: Resource requests vs limits — how do you set them?
A: Request: minimum guaranteed; scheduler uses it to place the pod.
Limit: ceiling; container is throttled (CPU) or OOM-killed (memory) above it.
Practical: memory request = limit (avoid OOM surprises from overcommit). CPU request = expected steady-state, CPU limit either omitted or set generously (CPU throttling causes weird latency tails). Profile real workload before guessing.

Q: How do rolling updates work in a Deployment?
A: maxUnavailable and maxSurge parameters. Kubernetes spins up new pods, waits for readiness, terminates old ones. If new pods fail readiness → rollout halts. Always set readiness probes correctly — without them, traffic hits broken pods. Rollback: kubectl rollout undo deployment/foo.

Q: ConfigMap vs Secret vs external secrets.
A: ConfigMap: non-sensitive config (feature flags, log levels).
Secret: sensitive data, base64-encoded by default (NOT encrypted at rest unless you enable etcd encryption). Mount as files or env vars.
External secrets: External Secrets Operator, AWS Secrets Manager CSI, Vault Agent — secrets fetched from a real secret store at runtime. Production should use external secret managers, not raw Kubernetes Secrets.

Q: How do you debug a pod that’s CrashLoopBackOff?
A: Working order: kubectl get pod (status, restart count) → kubectl describe pod (events, reason for last termination) → kubectl logs --previous (logs from the dead container, not the new one) → kubectl exec -it ... -- sh if a sidecar can hold the pod long enough → check resource limits, image pull errors, missing config/secret refs, failing readiness probe.

Q: How do you debug a service that’s reachable but slow?
A: Layer by layer. Pod itself: CPU throttling (container_cpu_cfs_throttled_periods_total), memory pressure, GC pauses. Network: kubectl exec into a debug pod, curl the service ClusterIP — does it match pod IP latency? Upstream: is it the DB, downstream API, Kafka? Distributed tracing with OpenTelemetry tells you where the time is going. Don’t guess — pull a flame graph or trace.

Q: StatefulSet — when do you need one?
A: When pods need stable identity + stable storage. Each replica gets a predictable hostname (db-0, db-1) and its own PVC. Use cases: databases (Postgres, Cassandra), Kafka brokers, ZooKeeper. Don’t use StatefulSets when a Deployment + external managed DB works — running databases in K8s yourself is operationally heavy.

Q: Horizontal Pod Autoscaler — what does it do?
A: Scales pod count based on metrics (CPU by default, custom metrics via metrics adapter). For event-driven workloads (Kafka consumer based on lag), KEDA is the right tool — scales on external triggers including Kafka lag, SQS queue depth, Prometheus metric. For an industrial telemetry consumer, KEDA on consumer lag is the cleanest pattern.

Q: Kustomize vs Helm.
A: Helm: package manager. Charts are templated YAML with values.yaml. Good for distributable third-party software (Postgres operator, kube-prometheus-stack).
Kustomize: patch-and-overlay. No templating language; merge a base manifest with environment-specific overlays. Good for your own apps where you want to keep manifests readable.
Practical answer: Helm for installing other people’s stuff, Kustomize for your own services. Many teams use both.

Q: What’s a sidecar container and a real example?
A: A second container in the same pod that augments the main app. Examples: log shipper (Fluent Bit reading the main container’s log file), service mesh proxy (Envoy/Linkerd), config reloader, OAuth proxy. Tradeoff: simpler than a separate deployment, but couples lifecycle to the main pod.

Q: CI/CD — what’s a sane pipeline for a Python service?
A: Pull request: lint (ruff), type check (mypy), unit tests (pytest with coverage gate), security scan (Trivy on dependencies, Bandit on code), build image, run image scan, integration tests against ephemeral env. On merge to main: rebuild image with semver tag, push to registry, deploy to staging (ArgoCD or Flux watching a manifest repo), run smoke tests. Promotion to prod: manual approval, same image tag deployed to prod cluster. GitHub Actions or GitLab CI drive the pipeline.

Q: What’s GitOps and why does it matter?
A: The desired state of the cluster lives in a Git repo. A controller (ArgoCD, Flux) syncs the cluster to match the repo. Wins: every change is auditable (Git log = deploy history), easy rollback (revert the commit), no kubectl apply from laptops, drift detection. For industrial / regulated environments where audit matters, GitOps is increasingly the default.

Q: How do you handle database migrations in CI/CD?
A: Migrations run before new app code. Pattern: a Job or initContainer runs Alembic / Flyway / golang-migrate against the DB, completes, then the new Deployment rolls. Constraint: every migration must be backward-compatible with the previous app version (additive — add column, deploy, then later drop the old column in a follow-up). Otherwise rolling deploys break: new code sees old schema or old code sees new schema.

Q: Blue/green vs canary deploys.
A: Blue/green: two full environments, switch traffic atomically. Easy rollback, expensive (2× capacity). Good for stateful flips.
Canary: route a small % of traffic to the new version, watch metrics, ramp up. Catches problems with real traffic at low blast radius. Needs traffic-splitting (Istio, Argo Rollouts, NGINX Ingress).
For industrial APIs with paying customers and tight SLAs: canary with auto-rollback on error-rate or latency regression.
Section K — Observability & Monitoring (Q286–295)

Q: The three pillars of observability.
A: Metrics, logs, traces. Metrics: numerical aggregates over time (request rate, p99 latency, queue depth). Cheap, dimensional, alertable. Logs: discrete events with context. Useful for forensic detail. Expensive at scale — sample or summarize. Traces: end-to-end request flow across services with timing per hop. Pinpoints “where did the time go?” in distributed systems. Combine all three. Metrics tell you something is wrong, traces tell you which service, logs tell you what exactly.

Q: What’s the difference between monitoring and observability?
A: Monitoring: watching predefined signals against thresholds. “CPU > 80%, alert.” Works when you know the failure modes. Observability: ability to ask new questions about your system from the data already collected. You don’t pre-define what to look for — you slice/dice metrics, traces, logs to investigate. Practically: monitoring catches the known unknowns, observability helps with the unknown unknowns. Modern systems need both.

Q: The four golden signals.
A: Google SRE book. Latency (request time, split successful vs failed), traffic (rate of requests / messages), errors (rate of failures, by type), saturation (how full the resource is — CPU, memory, queue depth). Cover these for every service and you’ve covered most outages. For an industrial data pipeline, add freshness (max event-time lag) — a pipeline can be “healthy” by the four signals while data is hours stale.

Q: Walk through a Prometheus + Grafana setup for a Python service.
A: Instrumentation: prometheus_client library exposes a /metrics endpoint. Define counters (http_requests_total), histograms (http_request_duration_seconds), gauges (active_connections). FastAPI integration via prometheus-fastapi-instrumentator. Scrape: Prometheus server scrapes /metrics every 15–30s based on a ServiceMonitor (Prometheus Operator) or static config. Storage: Prometheus local TSDB for short term (15d), remote-write to long-term store (Thanos, Cortex, Mimir, VictoriaMetrics) for retention. Dashboards: Grafana, with PromQL queries. Pre-build panels for the four golden signals. Alerts: Alertmanager routes by severity — pager for SLO burn, Slack for warnings.

Q: What’s an SLI, SLO, SLA?
A: SLI (indicator): the metric — e.g., “fraction of requests under 300ms.”
SLO (objective): internal target — “99.5% of requests under 300ms over 30 days.”
SLA (agreement): customer-facing contract with refunds/penalties — usually weaker than the SLO.
Error budget: 1 - SLO. With a 99.5% SLO, you have a 0.5% error budget. If you’re burning it fast, freeze risky deploys. Keeps reliability work prioritized vs feature pressure.

Q: What is OpenTelemetry?
A: The vendor-neutral standard for instrumentation. One SDK, many backends. You instrument your code with OTel APIs (or auto-instrumentation agents); the OTel Collector receives traces/metrics/logs and ships them to Jaeger/Tempo/Datadog/Honeycomb/whatever. Wins: no vendor lock-in, you can swap backends without re-instrumenting.

Q: Walk through tracing a request through a distributed pipeline.
A: Request hits the FastAPI gateway. Middleware extracts/creates a trace ID and span. The gateway calls a downstream Kafka producer — span ID is propagated as a header in the message (W3C traceparent). Stream processor consumes, picks up the parent span, creates a child span for its work. Downstream TSDB write is another child span. End result: one trace shows the entire request path with timing and error attribution per service. Without trace propagation, distributed debugging is guesswork.

Q: Cardinality explosion in metrics — what is it and how do you avoid it?
A: Each unique combination of label values creates a new time series. Adding user_id as a label with 1M users = 1M series per metric → memory blow-up. Rules of thumb: keep label values bounded (status_code, endpoint, region). Never put unbounded high-cardinality fields (user IDs, request IDs, tag IDs in SCADA with 100k tags). For per-tag visibility, use logs or traces, not metrics. For SCADA telemetry: aggregate first, then export metrics. Per-tag freshness goes to a derived health table, not a Prometheus label.

Q: Structured logging — why and how?
A: Why: searchable, queryable, joinable with traces. Plain-text logs are forensic-grade only. How: emit JSON with consistent fields (timestamp, level, service, trace_id, event, attrs). Python: structlog or loguru configured for JSON output. Critical: include the trace ID in every log line so logs correlate with traces. Critical: never log PII or secrets — at minimum, scrubbing middleware.

Q: Walk through how you’d diagnose a “data is stale” alert in a SCADA pipeline.
A: Alert: tag freshness > 5 minutes. Step 1: which tags? Drill into the freshness metric — single tag, one asset, all tags? Step 2: if all tags → likely upstream (gateway/Kafka producer). Check Kafka consumer lag (jumped or steady?). Check producer-side metrics (gateway connection count, OPC-UA session state). Step 3: if subset → likely a routing/filter issue downstream. Trace one stale tag’s last update through producer → Kafka → consumer logs → DB. Step 4: correlate with deploys (last 30 min) and infra events (node restart, network blip). Step 5: mitigate (restart consumer, scale up partitions, fail over gateway), then post-incident, fix root cause and add prevention. The discipline: always confirm scope before acting.
Section L — Coding Challenge Prep (Q296–310)
This section directly targets the WebCreek live-coding pattern: SQL window function for trend analysis, Python string parsing for time calculations, async API integration with date normalization and JSON serialization. Practice each pattern until it’s automatic — they’re going to throw a problem from this family at you.

Q: Live coding setup — what to do in the first 60 seconds.
A: Don’t dive in. Read the problem twice, then restate it back (“So the input is X, expected output is Y, and edge cases I’m watching for are A, B, C — does that match?”). This catches misunderstanding early and signals senior thinking. Then sketch inputs/outputs as a comment, identify the data structure, mention complexity, and start with a brute-force-correct solution. Optimize after it works.

Q: SQL coding pattern — Month-over-Month percent change. Walk through it cold.
A: Problem statement: given a sales table (sale_date DATE, region TEXT, amount NUMERIC), return monthly revenue per region with month-over-month percent change.
WITH monthly AS (
    SELECT
        region,
        DATE_TRUNC(&#39;month&#39;, sale_date) AS month,
        SUM(amount)                    AS revenue
    FROM sales
    GROUP BY region, DATE_TRUNC(&#39;month&#39;, sale_date)
),
with_prev AS (
    SELECT
        region,
        month,
        revenue,
        LAG(revenue) OVER (PARTITION BY region ORDER BY month) AS prev_revenue
    FROM monthly
)
SELECT
    region,
    month,
    revenue,
    prev_revenue,
    ROUND(
        100.0 * (revenue - prev_revenue) / NULLIF(prev_revenue, 0),
        2
    ) AS mom_pct_change
FROM with_prev
ORDER BY region, month;
Talk through these points as you write: 1. CTE 1 aggregates to monthly buckets with DATE_TRUNC. 2. CTE 2 uses LAG partitioned by region — every region’s MoM is independent. 3. NULLIF(prev_revenue, 0) prevents divide-by-zero (for first month or zero-revenue month). 4. First month’s prev_revenue is NULL → MoM is NULL, which is correct. 5. 100.0 (not 100) forces float division in Postgres. 6. ROUND(..., 2) for readable output.
Likely follow-ups they’ll ask: - “What if a region has gaps?” → generate a date series with generate_series and LEFT JOIN, or use RANGE window with date interval. - “How would you compute YoY?” → LAG(revenue, 12) OVER (...). - “What’s the time complexity / performance concern?” → window functions are O(N log N) due to sort; an index on (region, sale_date) helps the underlying scan.

Q: SQL pattern — 7-day rolling average.
A: SELECT
    sale_date,
    amount,
    AVG(amount) OVER (
        ORDER BY sale_date
        ROWS BETWEEN 6 PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW
    ) AS rolling_7d_avg
FROM daily_sales
ORDER BY sale_date;
Use ROWS (positional) for “last 7 rows.” If your data has gaps and you want “last 7 calendar days,” use RANGE BETWEEN INTERVAL &#39;6 days&#39; PRECEDING AND CURRENT ROW (Postgres only).

Q: SQL pattern — top-N per group.
A: Top 3 best-selling products per category:
WITH ranked AS (
    SELECT
        category,
        product,
        revenue,
        ROW_NUMBER() OVER (PARTITION BY category ORDER BY revenue DESC) AS rn
    FROM products
)
SELECT category, product, revenue
FROM ranked
WHERE rn <= 3;
Choose your ranker: - ROW_NUMBER() — strict 1, 2, 3, no ties. - RANK() — ties get same rank, gaps after (1, 2, 2, 4). - DENSE_RANK() — ties same rank, no gaps (1, 2, 2, 3).
If they ask “what if there’s a tie at rank 3?” — clarify: do they want exactly 3 rows, or all rows tied at 3? ROW_NUMBER() for the first, RANK() <= 3 for the second.

Q: Python string parsing — extract minutes from “Xh Ym” format.
A: Problem: input strings like "2h 30m", "45m", "1h". Return total minutes.
import re

def parse_to_minutes(s: str) -> int:
    """Parse &#39;Xh Ym&#39; format to total minutes. Raises ValueError on bad input."""
    if not s:
        raise ValueError("Empty input")

    pattern = re.compile(r&#39;^\s*(?:(\d+)h)?\s*(?:(\d+)m)?\s*$&#39;)
    match = pattern.match(s.lower())
    if not match or (match.group(1) is None and match.group(2) is None):
        raise ValueError(f"Bad format: {s!r}")

    hours = int(match.group(1) or 0)
    minutes = int(match.group(2) or 0)
    return hours * 60 + minutes

# Quick tests
assert parse_to_minutes("2h 30m") == 150
assert parse_to_minutes("45m") == 45
assert parse_to_minutes("1h") == 60
assert parse_to_minutes(" 2H 30M ") == 150  # case + whitespace
try:
    parse_to_minutes("garbage")
except ValueError:
    pass
Talking points: - I’d normalize case + strip whitespace. - Both groups optional but at least one required. - Regex is the cleanest pattern; manual split is more brittle. - I always include a couple of asserts as “fast tests” to demonstrate I think about edge cases.

Q: Python string parsing — convert “HH:MM:SS” to seconds.
A: def hms_to_seconds(s: str) -> int:
    parts = s.strip().split(":")
    if len(parts) not in (2, 3):
        raise ValueError(f"Expected HH:MM:SS or MM:SS, got {s!r}")
    if not all(p.isdigit() for p in parts):
        raise ValueError(f"Non-numeric component in {s!r}")
    nums = list(map(int, parts))
    if len(nums) == 2:
        m, s_ = nums
        h = 0
    else:
        h, m, s_ = nums
    if not (0 <= m < 60 and 0 <= s_ < 60):
        raise ValueError(f"Out-of-range minutes/seconds in {s!r}")
    return h * 3600 + m * 60 + s_

assert hms_to_seconds("01:23:45") == 5025
assert hms_to_seconds("12:34") == 754

Q: Python — compute time difference between ISO timestamp strings.
A: from datetime import datetime, timezone

def diff_minutes(start_iso: str, end_iso: str) -> float:
    start = datetime.fromisoformat(start_iso)
    end = datetime.fromisoformat(end_iso)
    # Coerce naive to UTC if needed (or raise)
    if start.tzinfo is None:
        start = start.replace(tzinfo=timezone.utc)
    if end.tzinfo is None:
        end = end.replace(tzinfo=timezone.utc)
    return (end - start).total_seconds() / 60.0

assert diff_minutes("2026-05-08T09:00:00Z", "2026-05-08T10:30:00Z") == 90.0
Note for Python ≤3.10: fromisoformat doesn’t accept Z suffix — use dateutil.parser.isoparse or manually replace Z with +00:00. Python 3.11+ handles Z natively.

Q: Async API integration — fetch from N endpoints concurrently with httpx.
A: import asyncio
import httpx

async def fetch_one(client: httpx.AsyncClient, url: str) -> dict:
    r = await client.get(url, timeout=10.0)
    r.raise_for_status()
    return r.json()

async def fetch_all(urls: list[str], concurrency: int = 10) -> list[dict]:
    sem = asyncio.Semaphore(concurrency)

    async def bounded(url: str):
        async with sem:
            return await fetch_one(client, url)

    async with httpx.AsyncClient() as client:
        return await asyncio.gather(*(bounded(u) for u in urls))

# Usage
urls = [f"https://api.example.com/items/{i}" for i in range(100)]
results = asyncio.run(fetch_all(urls, concurrency=20))
Talking points: - asyncio.gather for fan-out, Semaphore to bound concurrency (not 100 simultaneous connections). - AsyncClient reused — connection pooling. - Explicit timeout per request. - raise_for_status for HTTP errors. - For partial-failure tolerance: asyncio.gather(..., return_exceptions=True) and handle each result.

Q: The likely WebCreek assessment combo — async API + date sequence + JSON serialization.
A: Plausible problem statement: “Call this API, which returns activity data per day. The dates may have gaps. Fill the gaps with zeros, sort by date, and serialize the result as JSON.”
import asyncio
import json
from datetime import datetime, timedelta, date
import httpx

async def fetch_activity(client: httpx.AsyncClient, day: date) -> dict:
    r = await client.get(f"https://api.example.com/activity/{day.isoformat()}")
    r.raise_for_status()
    return r.json()  # {"date": "...", "count": 42}

async def build_report(start: date, end: date) -> str:
    days = []
    current = start
    while current <= end:
        days.append(current)
        current += timedelta(days=1)

    async with httpx.AsyncClient(timeout=10.0) as client:
        sem = asyncio.Semaphore(10)
        async def bounded(d: date):
            async with sem:
                try:
                    return await fetch_activity(client, d)
                except httpx.HTTPStatusError as e:
                    if e.response.status_code == 404:
                        return {"date": d.isoformat(), "count": 0}  # gap → zero
                    raise

        results = await asyncio.gather(*(bounded(d) for d in days))

    # Build a date-keyed dict to handle dupes/gaps deterministically
    by_date = {r["date"]: r["count"] for r in results}
    sequence = [
        {"date": d.isoformat(), "count": by_date.get(d.isoformat(), 0)}
        for d in days
    ]
    return json.dumps(sequence, indent=2)

# asyncio.run(build_report(date(2026, 1, 1), date(2026, 1, 31)))
This pattern hits every keyword in the JD: async, API integration, date-sequence normalization, gap fill, JSON serialization. Practice it cold.

Q: JSON serialization — handling datetime, Decimal, custom objects.
A: import json
from datetime import datetime, date
from decimal import Decimal

class IndustrialJSONEncoder(json.JSONEncoder):
    def default(self, obj):
        if isinstance(obj, (datetime, date)):
            return obj.isoformat()
        if isinstance(obj, Decimal):
            return float(obj)  # or str(obj) to preserve precision
        if hasattr(obj, "__dict__"):
            return obj.__dict__
        return super().default(obj)

data = {"ts": datetime.utcnow(), "amount": Decimal("123.45")}
json.dumps(data, cls=IndustrialJSONEncoder)
For production: prefer pydantic .model_dump_json() — handles all of this and validates inbound. For one-off scripts, custom encoder is fine.

Q: The Fibonacci question (a known WebCreek favorite).
A: # Iterative — what they want
def fib(n: int) -> int:
    if n < 0:
        raise ValueError("n must be non-negative")
    if n < 2:
        return n
    a, b = 0, 1
    for _ in range(n - 1):
        a, b = b, a + b
    return b

# Memoized recursive — also fine
from functools import lru_cache
@lru_cache(maxsize=None)
def fib_memo(n: int) -> int:
    if n < 2:
        return n
    return fib_memo(n - 1) + fib_memo(n - 2)
Talk through: “Naïve recursion is O(2^n) — exponential and unnecessary. I’ll go with the iterative version for O(n) time, O(1) space. Memoized recursion is also O(n) but uses O(n) stack.” Then write it. Don’t write naïve recursion as your final answer — it’s the trap.

Q: FizzBuzz with style.
A: def fizzbuzz(n: int) -> list[str]:
    return [
        "FizzBuzz" if i % 15 == 0
        else "Fizz" if i % 3 == 0
        else "Buzz" if i % 5 == 0
        else str(i)
        for i in range(1, n + 1)
    ]
Why not i % 3 == 0 and i % 5 == 0? Equivalent but less elegant. Why % 15 first? Order matters — most-specific case first. If a senior asks you to do FizzBuzz, this clean version + a couple of asserts is the move.

Q: Coding Q — find a duplicate in a list. Multiple approaches.
A: # O(n) time, O(n) space — set
def find_dup_set(xs):
    seen = set()
    for x in xs:
        if x in seen:
            return x
        seen.add(x)
    return None

# O(n log n) time, O(1) space — sort
def find_dup_sort(xs):
    s = sorted(xs)
    for i in range(1, len(s)):
        if s[i] == s[i - 1]:
            return s[i]
    return None

# O(n) time, O(1) space — Floyd&#39;s cycle (only if values are 1..n)
# Mention but don&#39;t write unless asked.
Always offer multiple approaches with tradeoffs. Senior signal.

Q: Common interview anti-patterns to avoid.
A: Diving in without reading the prompt. Always read twice, restate.
Optimizing prematurely. Get correct first, then optimize, narrating tradeoffs.
Silent typing. Talk through your thinking. Even “let me think for a moment” is better than silence.
Refusing to use Google docs / paper notes. “Mind if I sketch the data flow?” is a senior move.
Not testing. Always run a couple of asserts or trace through inputs by hand.
Pretending to know. “I haven’t used Flink in production — but here’s how I’d reason about the choice” is stronger than fake confidence.

Q: The full live-coding closing — the last thing you say.
A: After the solution works, before they move on: > “If we had more time, I’d want to: add proper logging with the trace ID, parametrize the timeouts and retry policy, add a few more edge-case tests — empty input, single-element input, very large input. And I’d containerize it with a multi-stage Dockerfile and a healthcheck. For production, I’d put rate limiting on the outbound API calls so we don’t blow the third-party’s quota.”
That sentence — unprompted — is what separates a senior candidate from a mid-level one. It tells them you think beyond the immediate task. Practice saying it.

Final Prep Checklist (Tuesday May 12 night)
The night before: 1. Re-read Section A (company intel) and Section B (resume STAR stories) one more time. 2. Re-read Section L (coding patterns) — visualize writing the MoM SQL and the async-API-with-gap-fill cold. 3. Pick 3 questions you’d ask the interviewer. Write them on an index card. Suggested: - “What does the first 90 days look like for someone in this role?” - “What’s the team’s biggest current technical challenge?” - “How does WebCreek balance staff augmentation work with internal product development?” 4. Lay out clothes (business casual — collared shirt, dark pants, dress shoes; bring a notepad and printed resumes). 5. Confirm Houston address + parking + travel time. Aim to arrive 20 min early, walk in 10 min early. 6. Print 3 copies of resume.
Morning of (Wed May 13): - Light breakfast, no heavy carbs. Coffee ok. - Re-read your $7.7M investigation story once more — that’s your headline asset. - Drive with extra time buffer (Houston traffic is unforgiving). - Phone on silent, not off — keep it accessible for the recruiter.
In the room — opening 60 seconds: - Firm handshake, eye contact, “Pleasure to meet you, thanks for the time today.” - Sit down, place notepad and resume on the table, take a sip of water. - Don’t fill silence — let them set the tone.
Closing the interview: - “I’m genuinely excited about the SCADA + Python intersection here — it’s where my 12 years of plant-floor experience and my last two years of production Python work line up.” - “What are the next steps in your process?” - “Is there anything from my background you’d like me to expand on?”

Strategic Framing Reminders (don’t break character on these)
You are a Senior Python Developer with 12 years of industrial operations experience. Not a “Data Scientist who used to work in oil & gas.” That framing is for ML-shop interviews; here, lead with industrial.
Real plant-floor experience is your moat. Most candidates have read about SCADA. You’ve operated it. Lean into specifics: PLCs, RTUs, ATG, custody-transfer measurement, OISD standards, plant control room shifts.
The $7.7M investigation is your headline. Bring it up unprompted in the resume walkthrough — it answers “tell me about your biggest impact” before they ask.
APES + HP Dhruv are your Python production credentials. Both are real, deployed, with real users. Don’t be modest about traffic numbers.
EAD authorized, no sponsorship needed, Lewisville-based, willing to relocate to Houston — say this clearly when asked about location. Removes a hidden objection.
Salary anchor: $115K–$135K for the Senior role given Glassdoor data + Houston cost of living + your 12 years of experience. Don’t quote a number first if you can avoid it; if pushed, “Based on the role’s scope and Houston market for senior roles, I’m targeting $115K–$135K, but I’m flexible on the right opportunity.”
You’ve prepped harder than 95% of candidates who’ll walk into that room. Trust the prep.
— End of WebCreek Interview Prep Master
